THE FOUNDER'S
GUIDE TO UK
CRYPTO LAW
EDITED BY LISA MCGLORY AND CESSIAH LOPEZ

Disclaimer: This guide provides general information and without limitation is not legal, tax, strategic or financial advice. Please do your own further research. For 
advice specific to your situation, consult a qualified professional.


CONTENT
Here are all the content of the pdf with its respective page number.

Acknowledgements - 6
Editor’s Note - 7 
Introduction- 9 
The UK as a Base for Distributed Ledger Technology,
Tokenisation and Fintech (Aleksandra Wawrzyszczuk 
LawtechUK and New York University) - 6
Quick Takeaways from this Guide - 12

CHAPTER 01 
Product, Design and Planning -15 
1.1 Tokenomics: Designing a Product that powers
Ecosystems and empowers Holders
(Mohamed Ezeldin - Animoca Brands) - 16
1.2 Tokenisation (Charles Kerrigan - CMS; RAK DAO) -19 
1.3 What is a Token Warrant? 
(Anne Rose and Callum Blundell - Mishcon de Reya) -21
1.4 Product, Data and Compliance-by-Design
(Derya Karli - Own Protocol and Lisa McClory - D2
Legal Technology) -23 
1.5 Computable Contracts (Akber Datoo - D2 Legal
Technology and Co-Chair, Law Society of England
and Wales Technology and Law Committee) -33
1.6 Navigating Legal Architectures: Building your Web3
Project on Solana in the UK 
(Marcus Bagnall - Wiggin) -34
1.7 Decentralised Autonomous Organisations
(Professor Sarah Green - D2 Legal Technology) -39
1.8 Exploring Offshore Jurisdictions: Things to think
about (Sara Hall - Walkers) -42
1.9 DAO Legal and Tax Standards (Joni Pirovich -
Regulatory Interoperability Lead, DAOstar (a project of
The Metagovernance Project Inc) -43

CHAPTER 02
Token Typologies -45
2.1 Web3 Games (Omri Bouton - Outlier Ventures) -46
2.2 SocialFi: Boosting Organic User Growth with
SocialFi (lan Cox - CEO and Founder, Avark Agency /
Manchester Blockchain Alliance) -50
2.3 DePIN (Morgan Lewis - Brabners LLP) -51
2.4 Practical Guide for DeFi Developers
(Maria Riivari - Avara) -53


CHAPTER 03
Setting up for Success and Risk Mitigation (Leon
Hurd - Cybersandbox and Keystone Law Limited) - 57
3.1 Overview of Anti-Money Laundering (AML), 
Sanctions and Compliance Law - 58
3.2 AML registration with the UK Financial Conduct
Authority (FCA) -58 
3.3 Authorisation under FSMA -59
3.4 Electronic Money Regulations / Payment Service
Regulations -60
3.5 Sanctions -60


CHAPTER 04
UK Regulation of the Financial Promotion of
Cryptoassets (Andrew Maguire, Littleton
Chambers) - 63


CHAPTER 05
Tax and Accounting -67
5.1 The 5 W’s (Mark Pearce - Alkimi) -68
5.2 Overview of Tax and Accounting for Crypto
Projects (Dion Seymour - Andersen Uk) -71


CHAPTER 06
Tracing, Freezing and Recovery — When Crypto
Assets are Stolen (Matt Green - Lawrence
Stephens and Marcin Zarakowski - Token
Recovery) - 77
6.1 Cryptoasset Tracing - 78
6.2 Legal Procedures 
Product, Design and Planning -79

CHAPTER 07
You’re Off - Token Launch (James Burnie and
Pavan Kaur - WAGMI Advisers, Gunnercooke) - 81
7.1 Legal: Boring until it isn’t! - 82
7.2 Beyond the Legal: a CMO’s Perspective -83
7.5 Let’s face the Music and Dance -86

CHAPTER
The Importance of Community and Web3
Accelerators (Cap - Superteam UK) - 87



DISCLAIMERS - Page 5
The content contained in this publication is not legal, financial or tax advice, nor any recommendation to
use any product or service. The mention of specific organisations, technologies or products does not imply
that they are endorsed or recommended in preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned.
You are responsible for seeking your own independent and professional advice based on your
circumstances. The publishers, editors, authors, contributors and reviewers of this publication, and their
affiliated entities and employers, do not accept responsibility or liability for any claims that may arise from
your use or reliance on this publication, and none are responsible for outdated or incomplete content. You
are responsible for checking the currency and accuracy of content in this publication. All rights reserved.
Whilst this guide refers to the UK, different laws may apply to activities in England and Wales, Scotland and
Northern Ireland and you should seek advice from suitably qualified professionals in the relevant
jurisdiction.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS - Page 6
Editors
Cessiah Lopez, Superteam UK
Lisa McClory, D2 Legal Technology
Many thanks to Superteam UK and to all the expert contributors to this essential
guide (in alphabetical order):
Contributors
Akber Datoo, D2 Legal Technology and Co-Chair Law Society Technology and Law Committee
Aleksandra Wawrzyszczuk, LawtechUK and New York University School of Law
Andrew Maguire, Littleton Chambers
Anne Rose, Mishcon de Reya LLP
Callum Blundell, Mishcon de Reya LLP
Cap, Superteam UK
Charles Kerrigan, CMS; RAK DAO
Derya Karli, Own Protocol
Dion Seymour, Andersen LLP
lan Cox, Avark Agency / Manchester Blockchain Alliance
James Burnie, WAGMI Advisers, Gunnercooke LLP
Joni Pirovich, DAOstar (a project of the The Metagovernance Project Inc)
Leon Hurd, CyberSandbox and Keystone Law Ltd
Marcin Zarakowski, Token Recovery
Maria Riivari, Avara
Marcus Bagnall, Wiggin LLP
Mark Pearce, Alkimi
Matt Green, Lawrence Stephens Ltd
Mohamed Ezeldin, Animoca Brands
Morgan Lewis, Brabners LLP
Omri Bouton, Outlier Ventures
Pavan Kaur , WAGMI Advisers, Gunnercooke LLP
Sara Hall, Walkers
Professor Sarah Green, D2 Legal Technology

Thanks also to reviewers Daniel Maw, Christopher Brown and Sylvia Papadopoulou of D2 Legal Technology
With special thanks to our Media Partners LexisNexis UK.
PR and Marketing Support:
Jo Timmins
Design by: designticket.co
Cover design by: @1984drum


EDITOR'S NOTE - Page 7
Lisa McClory
9 December 2024
The idea for this Founders Guide to UK Crypto Law came
about during a conversation with Cap @ Superteam at the
inaugural BlockStart Scotland event, shortly after a very
engaging and question— filled legal discussion panel,
which really brought to light the urgent need for some solid
and practical guidance for projects looking to start out in
the Web3 space.
Much great guidance abounds, but much of it is also highly
technical, and not necessarily easy for non-lawyers to read!
So, this guide brings together many of the top experts in
the area to deliver on that objective - with the hope of
cutting through some of the mystery and complexity
surrounding Web3 law and reducing a few of the 'ifs, buts
and it-depends' that might categorise a project's
experience with trying to source good advice in this fast-
moving area.
Every person who has contributed to this guide has been
specifically chosen for their depth of experience and
expertise in their field, and as a result we have sourced a
great smorgasbord of topics to do with law, tax and
compliance, with practical tips that people won't read
anywhere else. We hope you will enjoy reading it.
This is of course a very exciting time to be actively working
and innovating in the Web3 industry. The advent of Al has
begun to combine with Web3 applications in myriad ways,
including onchain analytics applications, algorithmic trading
and more.' Sometimes Al helps blockchain by sifting and
sorting data, creating more opportunities for information
networks to engage with the offchain world. Sometimes it's
the other way around, and blockchain helps within the Al
development lifecycle, or assists with the creation of digital
trust and fidelity in an increasingly crowded and confusing
online environment — who can anymore say for certainty
that they would know a deepfake apart from the real thing?

Page 8
Increasingly, there will be joined-up applications of AlxCrypto Globally, crypto regulatory frameworks are growing, and
technology, with the addition of robotics, smart sensors, AR
and VR and more. We are always on the edge of rapid
many regulators are moving to introduce regulatory
frameworks that provide much-needed clarity and
change and innovative potential. Sometimes it feels as if we
are already living in Star Trek.
consistency in regulation of cryptoasset service providers and
trading platforms.
The opportunity for the UK is to be right at the centre of this
new industry and catalyse, incubate and grow innovation,
maximising the UK's knowledge economy and skilled digital
workforce to create ground-breaking new businesses in
emerging areas of the digital economy. The flexibility of the
common law and the UK's long-established reputation as a
centre of dispute resolution provides strong reasons for
projects to encode English law into their smart legal
Regulation is welcome and essential to ensure the steady and
safe growth of the cryptoasset industry. Proportionality is the
most important challenge for regulators, and in particular
ensuring access to good quality advice and support for start-
ups aiming to get a foothold in these new areas. Delivering
quickly on clear and user-friendly regulatory frameworks is an
imperative for all regulators seeking leadership in the digital
economy.
contracts. Of course, the benefits of this innovation and
access to opportunities should not just be focused on main
Accelerators such as Superteam UK are a totally essential part
centres of traditional financial services-led growth, but should of this solution, too, bridging the gap between professional
spread out right across the country - we need to make
advisors and projects and providing networks and co-working
space for fresh ideas, pioneering opportunities and creative-
spaces that are such an important resource for growing
thinking.
projects.
We are therefore proud to have collaborated not just with
Solana Superteam UK but also with the Manchester
Blockchain Alliance on this initiative, and our initial front cover
celebrates this colourful link with the Manchester spirit of
creative industry: the values of collaboration, friendship,
collective enterprise and creative-spirit resonate greatly with
the grassroots-led approach needed to deliver on the true
diverse and free-thinking potential of the digital economy.
So, this guide is intended as a starting point for builders and
entrepreneurs in the UK, acknowledging the important role
that law and regulation play. I hope it will help at least a few
projects a little further along the way in overcoming
uncertainty, and a few others to avoid some pitfalls, and
generally equip all readers with the essential knowledge to
empower and catalyse their ideas and full potential. We hope
this guide will be a living document and that there will be
much more to come.
At the time of launching this guide, we are following progress
with the UK's proposed new approach to crypto regulation,
with a crypto roadmap announced by the UK's Financial
Conduct Authority (FCA)? in November 2024, following Tulip
Siddiq MP's Mansion House speech' announcing a strategy
to focus on fintech as one of five priority growth
opportunities for the UK.
And riffing a little off our excellent chapter on Token Launch
below: "Things are only impossible, until they're not!" (Captain
Jean-Luc Picard of the Starship Enterprise)
Lisa McClory
' Al x Crypto (Version 9.1), Outlier Ventures (Feb. 2024)
2 Cryptoasset Roadmap, Financial Conduct Authority (03 February 2024)
3 Mansion House 2024 Speech, UK Government (14 Nov. 2024)


INTRODUCTION - Page 9
The UK as a Base for distributed ledger Technology,
Tokenisation and Fintech
(Aleksandra Wawrzyszczuk - LawtechUK and New York University)
In 2024, there is a notable momentum building in the race
for legal dominance over digitised markets, including
financial services operating digital assets.
When it comes to internationally mobile transactions, digital
assets are certainly leading the pack. For a borderless
technology, with an eye-watering market size (revenue in the
US alone in 2023 is projected US$60,150.0m),4 it is
unsurprising that the race for jurisdictional supremacy only
accelerated with the widening adoption of the technology.
For example, in digital capital markets, continental European
jurisdictions eagerly stepped in with legislation governing
digital securities, or transactions of issuance of debt or
equity on blockchain (and DLT) to establish a 'desirable' legal
framework. In addition to EU-wide efforts, culminating in
larger frameworks such as Regulation (EU) 2023/1114 on
Markets in Crypto-Assets ("MiCA"), some individual member
states took more targeted action at varying levels of
granularity. The willingness to 'get ahead' led France to
legislate on the matter of digital securities so early in the day
(2019) that it has already needed to update its PACTE Act for
2023.
Legislation is not the only way forward, however, English law
may already provide the necessary tools to address most of
the challenges arising in industries utilising digital assets. It
successfully accommodates new technology and business
innovations by incrementally developing doctrines grounded
in established general rules. Thanks to the breadth and
depth of its doctrinal backing, English law is highly portable;
it has already been adopted as governing law in cross-
border and global transactions in many contexts, ranging
from maritime law to capital markets.
In order to promote the message that English law serves
digital business, the UK's Ministry of Justice established the
UK Jurisdiction Taskforce (UKJT) to focus specifically on
promoting English law and the UK jurisdictions for the digital
economy. Chaired by Master of the Rolls, Head of Civil
Justice in England and Wales, and a vocal advocate for
common law, Sir Geoffrey Vos, the Taskforce coalesces a
multinational community to provide clarity on legal
controversies under English law.
The UK Jurisdiction Taskforce describes itself as 'an
industry-led initiative, tasked with promoting the use of
English law and UK's jurisdictions for technology and digital
innovation' It houses representatives from the Financial
Conduct Authority, City of London Corporation and,
importantly, the Law Commission, as well as senior
practitioners and judges. Its objective, broadly speaking, is
to clarify the legal position of digital assets under English law
and promote the UK's jurisdictions for digital economy. The
Taskforce already publishes so-called authoritative legal
statements' that seem to perform the functions that the Law
Commission wishes to delegate to the prospective panel.
The purpose of those statements is also to provide market
assurance of English law's clarity, clarifying key technical
issues arising in the industry, and how the English law
should respond to them. Unlike the Law Commission,
however, it does not make recommendations for future law
reform: instead, it simply analyses the existing laws and
explains them to the market.
4 Digital Assets - Worldwide, Statista Market Forecast, (July 2024)
5 UK Jurisdiction Taskforce (UKJT) Home, LawtechUK (Nov. 2023)
* High Court endorses UKJT Legal Statement and proprietary status of cryptoassets. Linklaters (May 17, 2001).

Page - 10
What underpins the Taskforce's mission is the assumption
that legal clarity and certainty is good for business, and
English law (or common law in general) is perfectly capable
of providing not only flexibility but also security of outcomes.
It is hard to disagree with the assets and research that the
Taskforce has produced to further its agenda. The legal
statements are a result of extensive public and private
consultations, drafted collectively by a team consisting of
senior experts in a given area, in close dialogue with the Law
Commission, with whose projects the Taskforce's work is
vastly complementary. Undeniably, the Taskforce, which
includes former Law Commissioner Sarah Green, has been a
helpful testing bed for the Commission's intuitions. For
example, the Legal Statement on Cryptoassets and Smart
Contracts first suggested the creation of a new category of
property of digital assets back in 2019.
But the power of the UKJT is in its judicial endorsement,
which helps raise its authority among the courts and legal
practitioners. If a statement receives a stamp of approval
from the second most senior judge in the country, it is likely
that other members of the judiciary will be more confident to
adopt it. For example, the findings of the UKT's Legal
Statement on Cryptoassets and Smart Contracts were
endorsed by the commercial division of the High Court in AA
v Persons Unknown, a case deciding the point whether
Bitcoin (BTC) could be considered as property for the
purposes of granting a proprietary injunction over Bitcoin.
The opinion specifically cited the statement as well as
specific points from its analysis of the nature of cryptoassets,
further affirming the reasoning from B2C2 v Quoine,® one of
the first cases to apply common law of contracts and torts to
cryptocurrency trading.?
The same rings true in a non-contentious context. Following
the UKJT's publication of research on the Economic Value of
Digital Securities,° accompanied by the Legal Statement on
Digital Securities" earlier this year, we witnessed the
establishment and launch of Euroclear's Digital Financial
Market Infrastructure,
7 AA v. Persons Unknown [2019] EWHC 3556 (Comm) (17 January 2020)
8 B2C2 Ltd v Quoine Pte Ltd [20191 SGHC() 3
the first central securities depository capable of handling English law
securities, followed by the inaugural digital securities issuance by the
World Bank under English law.!2 Granted that Euroclear was
represented by Linklaters, who are actively involved in the Taskforce,
but the signal that this successful transaction sends to the market is
immense.
The Taskforce complements the strategic vision of the Law
Commission, which has done enormous amounts of work to
demonstrate the value of English law as a leading jurisdiction for
digital assets. Since November 2021, it has announced five projects in
emerging technologies: three reviews (digital assets, smart contracts
and electronic trade documents) have been concluded, and two
(conflict of laws and DAOs) are due to be delivered shortly. 13 The
comprehensive programme of work sends a strong signal to the
market that the UK is as serious about capturing tech as it has been
about traditional financial services.
Various projects across the market consistently highlight that English
law:
• provides sufficient assurance to the market to instill confidence in
outcomes: 'if you do x, y will happen.'
• offers sufficient flexibility to accommodate novel scenarios
(reasonable management of expectations ex ante, not ex post)
without compromising predictability (rules do not change
haphazardly without good cause).
• if a regulatory response is required, it is always timely: as agile as
technology that drives the market.
• is cheap and straightforward to comply with, eliminating any
negative impact on new or potential market entrants.
• is aligned with business objectives and incentives of market
participants who generate value to the economy.
• underpins the legal system, including the courts, which
demonstrates deep institutional understanding of:
• technology and its potential future:
• finance and its potential future.
• exemplifies portability, facilitating multi-jurisdictional
transactions and borderless application of uniform rules.
• tech-neutral and capable of guiding business activities
irrespective of changing technology.
id
10 English law and Digital Securities, Oxera x LawtechUK (Feb. 2023)
' Legal Statement on the Issuance and Transfer of Digital Securities, LawtechUK (Feb. 2023)
*Citi acts as first Issuing and Paying Agent for World Bank on Euroclear's new D-FMI DLT platform, City, (Oct. 24, 2023);
Linklaters advises Euroclear Bank on the establishment and launch of its new Digital Securities Platform. and Euroclear Bank
and TD Securities on the inaugural digital securities issuance by the World Bank, Linklaters (Oct. 24, 2023)
13 Law Commission to review how private international law applies to digital assets and other emerging technology, Law Commission (Oct. 18, 2022)


Page -11 
Overall, the ongoing mission to inject confidence in the English legal
system within the digital assets community is beginning to show early
signs of success. While it may still ring true to some that English law
requires a more nuanced calculation of commercial risk than legislation, a
savvy lawyer will recognise the generally sensible attitude towards digital
assets from both the Law Commission and the political, legal and
business community. They also tend to appreciate that English law's
flexibility makes it generally more permissive towards creativity within
bounds of common sense.


QUICK TAKEAWAYS
FROM THIS GUIDE - Page 12
If you are in a hurry and
would like a quick digest of
this guide, here are some
of our top takeaways from
the different contributors'
sections:
• Tokens require thoughtful design, and must be a critical
component of their ecosystem. In the chapter on
Tokenomics' (Mo Ezeldin), you can read about the
importance of sustainable token economies for long-term
success of your project
• "If your business model involves dealing with TradFi firms
or products, you will need to understand how the current
system operates and work within it." To find out how, see
'Tokenisation' (Charles Kerrigan)
• From James Burnie and Pavan Kaur at Gunner Cooke /
WAGMI in the section on 'Token Launch':
• There are some quick easy wins in terms of being able
to sell into the UK. For example, classical non-fungible
tokens (NFTs) sold into the UK from abroad are often
unregulated.
• As regulation increases globally, it is becoming
increasingly important to factor in how compliance will
be ensured using a cost-effective route appropriate for
the project.
• In order for a project to be successful, a more than
purely legal approach needs to be taken. Participants
have expectations regarding token launches and so
using an experienced Web3 CMO to navigate these
will help ensure the success of the token launch.
• Poorly drafted Token Warrants can often lead to issues for
a project, including oversupply of tokens > See 'What is a
Token Warrant' (Anne Rose and Callum Blundell) for more
tips on how to avoid pitfalls
• Data governance and security are an important way to
build compliance into your product from the get-go > for
checklists and suggestions of where to start, see 'Product,
Data and Compliance by Design' (Derya Karli and Lisa
McClory)
• Contracts need to go digital in order to be fit for the
Webs era: but what does this mean for lawyers? Read
"Computable Contracts' (Akber Datoo)
• Building a project, sure, but building a legal architecture?
How should you plan that? > Read 'Navigating Legal
Architectures: Building your Webs Project on Solana in
the UK' (Marcus Bagnall)
• "If truly decentralised decision-making power is to be
achieved or retained, significant thought should be given
as to how best to guard against this sort of concentration
of voting power" > Read 'Decentralised Autonomous
Organisations' (Professor Sarah Green) on some key
English legal factors to consider when building DAOs
• The Cayman Foundation is a popular offshore structure
for DAOs, including operating a fully decentralised DEX >
In 'Exploring Offshore Jurisdictions: Things to Think
about' (Sara Hall), you can read about the importance of
assessing the legal and regulatory status of the DAO's
interactions with onshore users and other important
things to bear in mind

Page -13
• Can you automate compliance through technical
standards? In 'DAO Legal and Tax Standards' (Joni
Pirovich of DAOstar, there is an introduction to the tools
available to DAOs for data standardisation, allowing better
interoperability with traditional legal and tax reporting
frameworks
• Many projects think about financial regulation, but what
about gambling regulation? > In 'Web3 Games' (Omri
Bouton), we break out the main things to consider
regarding Web3 Games, gambling regulation, loot boxes
and more
• Great SocialFi doesn't just happen, it needs careful
planning to provide a good experience for users > read
top tips for projects in 'Boosting Organic Growth with
SocialFi' (lan Cox)
• How does DePIN differ from a traditional cloud
computing arrangement? > The chapter on DePIN cloud
infrastructure agreements (Morgan Lewis) discusses how
to balance contractual terms with DePIN customers and
nodes, whilst providing adequate contractual protections
for the DePIN operator
• The lack of specificity over the application of law and
regulation in a decentralised context poses many
challenges for DeFi projects > in 'Practical Guidance for
DeFi Developers', read Maria Riivari for an overview and
some key practical considerations for DeFi projects when
managing decentralised compliance
• When do you need to get a licence for crypto activities,
and when are sanctions laws a concern? > Read Leon
Hurd of Cybersandbox and Keystone Law in 'Setting up
for Success (Risk Mitigation)'
• Tax administrations globally are increasing their efforts to
ensure that the correct tax is paid, including HMRC
recently sending "nudge letters" to review potentially
undeclared tax liabilities. As information on ownership of
cryptoassets continues to grow, proactive compliance is
an area of importance for all project founders. In 'Tax and
Accounting' (Dion Seymour) you can find a general
overview and key guidance, whilst 'The 5 W's' (Mark
Pearce) takes you through five 'who, what and where'
questions with respect to tax and accounting factors
• The UK's new rules extending regulation of financial
promotions to cryptoassets took effect in October 2023.
A helpful overview is provided by Andrew Maguire in 'UK
Regulation of Financial Promotions of Cryptoassets®
• How can you recover stolen cryptoassets, and what are
the most important first steps to take? > In 'Tracing,
Freezing and Recovery', Matt Green and Marcin
Zarakowski give an overview of cryptoasset tracing and
the steps involved in recovering stolen assets in the event
of a hack, theft or loss.

PRODUCT, DESIGN
AND PLANNING - Page 15 
Page - 16 
Tokenomics: Designing a Product that Powers
Ecosystems and Empowers Holders
(Mohamed Ezeldin - Animoca Brands)
Tokens are not just tools for governance or fundraising—they
are products in their own right. Like any product, they require
a suite of complementary systems to sustain them, along
with thoughtful design to ensure usability, engagement, and
longevity. Founders must treat tokenomics as a critical
component of the ecosystem, where both the token and the
surrounding products are meticulously designed to enhance
user experience and value.
The Token as a Product
3. Lifecycle Management:
Like any product, tokens go through a lifecycle. Founders
must plan for the long-term evolution of the token,
ensuring mechanisms like staking, lockups, and
deflationary pressures align with the project’s growth
trajectory.
When thinking of tokens as products, their success hinges on
three core principles:
1. Purpose and Utility:
The token must serve a clear purpose within the
ecosystem. Whether it's enabling governance,
incentivising user engagement, or unlocking features, the
token’s value is derived from its utility. A token without
utility risks becoming a speculative asset, detached from
the ecosystem’s core goals.
2. Supporting Ecosystem:
A token cannot exist in isolation. To thrive, it requires an
ecosystem of products and services that provide
continuous use cases. For example:
e Gaming Ecosystems: A game token might enable in-
game purchases, facilitate trading, or provide access
to exclusive content.
e Governance Ecosystems: Governance tokens must
be paired with robust decision-making platforms and
tools for transparency.
e DeFi Ecosystems: DeFi tokens should integrate with
yield strategies, staking, and liquidity provision
mechanisms to retain engagement.
Web2 vs. Web3S UX:
Designing for Two Worlds
Web2 and Web3 audiences bring fundamentally different
expectations to the table. In Web2, the focus is on seamless,
intuitive user interfaces with minimal cognitive load. In Web3,
the experience is often more technical, requiring familiarity
with wallets, tokens, and smart contracts.
1. Different UX Priorities:
e Web2 UX: Prioritises simplicity, reducing barriers to entry.
Users expect experiences like one-click logins, clear
navigation, and customer support.
e Web3 UX: Often appeals to tech-savvy, early adopters
who are comfortable with concepts like self-custody and
gas fees. This audience values transparency and
sovereignty over convenience.


Page - 17 
2. Bridging the Divide:
Founders must design products that cater to both
audiences. In the short term, most token interactions will
be dominated by Web3-native users, but as adoption
grows, Web2-style interfaces can help onboard a broader
audience. Hybrid approaches, like abstracting wallet
management or offering fiat onramps, can reduce friction
for Web2 users while maintaining Web3 functionality.
Community Dynamics and Expectations
Tokens are deeply tied to their communities, especially in the
early stages of a project. Founders must recognize and
design for the inherent expectations of Web3-savwvy users,
who often see participation as an entitlement to rewards.
1. Reward Culture:
e Incentives: Web3 users expect tangible rewards for their
participation, whether through staking, governance, or
contributing to the ecosystem.
e Engagement Models: Successful projects incorporate
gamification and social recognition to reinforce
participation, ensuring users feel both rewarded and
valued.
2. Feedback Loops:
Tokens thrive on active and engaged communities.
Mechanisms like governance votes, leaderboards, and
airdrops can create virtuous cycles, where participation
begets more engagement, which in turn strengthens the
ecosystem.
. Short-Term and Long-Term Alignment:
Web3 communities often emphasize short-term rewards,
but founders must balance this with the project’s long-
term vision. Strategies like vested rewards, fee-sharing
models, and progressive token unlocks can align short-
term engagement with sustainable growth.
Legal and Practical Considerations
When building tokens as products and integrating them into
a dual-audience ecosystem, several key legal and practical
factors must be addressed:
1. Interoperability:
Building ecosystems where Web2 and Web3 products
coexist requires interoperable infrastructure. Leveraging
standards like ERC-20/721 for Web3 and APls for Web2
integration ensures seamless interaction.
2. Scalability:
Projects must anticipate the demands of scaling from
Web3-savvy users to broader audiences. This includes
integrating Layer 2 solutions, optimising transaction costs,
and ensuring UX scalability.
3. Compliance and Regulation:
Tokens as products must still comply with UK (and global)
laws and regulations, including financial promotions and
AML/KYC requirements. Founders should design
incentives that align with legal constraints while remaining
attractive to users. For more on rules, compliance and
regulation in the context of token projects, please read on
after ‘The Bottom Line’.

Page - 18 
The Bottom Line
Treating your token as a standalone product ensures it is more than just a speculative asset. By designing thoughtful
ecosystems, balancing UX across Web2 and Web3, and catering to community dynamics, founders can build sustainable
token economies that attract users, drive engagement, foster long-term success and are legally compliant.

Tokenisation
(Charles Kerrigan - CMS; RAK DAO) - Page 19 
The first question might be: why do a token?
A response is perhaps: ‘To raise capital!’
For reasons we explain, however, this is not a good answer.
The reality is not as simple as some might think.
This is muddied by the fact that many 2017 ICOs did, in fact,
issue tokens and raise capital. Perhaps the best way of
thinking about this is that it is not so simple anymore.
Sometimes the first people who break some rules can do so
because regulators are not looking in their direction. Once
rules are broken though, regulators definitely are looking in
that direction.
As with everything in crypto, we have to start with some
definitions. Tokenisation means different things to different
people. So, the first thing you have to be clear on in your
project is what you mean by tokenisation.
Tokenisation is one of the ways we see the difference
between crypto and traditional finance (TradFi).
In TradFi, a token is a digital representation of a financial
instrument of some sort. It could be a stock or a bond or
other debt instrument. It could be cash. It could be an
alternative asset like wine or physical art. But current market
practice is to issue the stock or bond or whatever, then create
an onchain digital representation of it. The point is that the
way TradFi currently understands tokenisation is as a wrapper
around an existing product and process. This is the story of
the hugely successful BTC ETFs from the beginning of 2024.
They demonstrated investor appetite for BTC, not through
investors buying BTC direct or through exchanges, but by
getting exposure to BTC through a traditional financial
product, an ETF that owned BTC.
If your business model involves dealing with TradFi firms or
products, you will need to understand how the current
system operates and work within it. You can find information
on this by searching — Tokenisation + Investment
Association.
A final few points before we move on to how this works if you
are building outside the current financial system.
If you want to have TradFi firms as investors, partners, or
customers for anything:
e you will need a legal opinion confirming if you are inside
or outside the regulatory perimeter - i.e. if you need a
licence from a financial regulator to do what you're doing;
e you will need to be incorporated in a jurisdiction that has
a good reputation for regulation - many UK financial
institutions have a strong preference to deal with UK
based fintechs;
e you will need enough capital to be able to survive a long
process of answering questions from different
stakeholders.
That covers enough on tokens and business models that are
inside the current financial system.
In crypto native conversation a token can refer to a number
of things.
A token can simply be a message or instruction between
computers. That is not what people think of as tokenisation.
Tokens of this type are not recognised by the legal systems as
assets. They generally therefore do not have value because
they have no existence beyond the sending of the message.
So, when we talk about tokens, we are generally talking about
tokens that have value or utility on a blockchain. Tokens of
this type can be recognised by legal systems as assets.
This distinction is important because it goes to the question
of whether a token is suitable for fundraising or not.

Page -20 
If fundraising is a primary use case for your token, it will
trigger rules relating to securities issuance. This is why the
argument about whether a token is or isn't a security is so
significant. A token that is a security must be issued in
accordance with securities rules and regulations. These differ
jurisdiction by jurisdiction but they all have some common
features. Regulators would refer to these features as relating
to investor protection and market integrity.
Investor protection centres on things like making full and fair
disclosures of all relevant information. Relevant information
means details of the issuer, the issuer's business model, the
terms of the tokens (securities), risk factors etc. Traditional
forms of whitepapers are not "MiCA compliant", so there are
no good precedents for new projects to use now.
In fact, recent regulation is designed to harmonise rules
relating to securities and unregulated tokens to remove the
ability for issuers to arbitrage between the rules. The recent
European rules you will have heard referred to as MiCA
essentially read across to tokens the equivalent rules that
already apply to securities. A MiCA-compliant whitepaper will
look more like an IPO prospectus than a traditional
whitepaper for a token.
Market integrity centres on things like restrictions on front-
running, trading on inside information, manipulating prices or
order flow, and anything else that puts some investors in
before worse position than others. The worst offence is for
the team to make money from inside information. That is
usually illegal. It also kills projects because it destroys trust.
Crypto lawyers spend a lot of time analysing the rules that
classify tokens. A token that gives a holder rights like those
that a shareholder in a company would get will be a security.
A token that does not have those rights will not and will
therefore not be subject to securities regulations. If proceeds
of a token issuance will be used to fund the costs of the
company that issues the token, or if the investor is buying the
token to get a return, these are indications that the token is a
security. Remember how different BTC is to this — no issuer,
no promises, no controller beyond the community. Its value
comes only from its hard-capped scarcity.
The short point here is that taking in money from a third-
party investor is one of the most serious things that a
business or project can do in the eyes of regulators so there
are high barriers to entry. Broadly, third party money is an
investment (in shares or tokens) made by a person who is not
personally known to you. Regulators care about this for the
reasons set out above, summarised as: you might lose the
investors their money.
By this they mean that you might literally lose it because you
get hacked through not having spent enough time or money
on security, or you might misspend it, use it as your own, or
any number of other problems. Regulators also care about
preventing financial crime. If you take investment from a
criminal, then you may be holding the proceeds of crime.
Holding proceeds of crime is an offence. Returning them is
money laundering. Some of these rules exist to save
inexperienced projects from themselves. If you are not used
to handling other people's money, you need to do a lot of
work understanding your responsibilities before you do so.
The analysis so far focused on securities because those are
the rules made famous by Gary Gensler. Alongside them
there are similar rules and requirements for projects that pool
capital. In the UK these rules require "collective investment
schemes" to be licensed. In Europe, they require fund
vehicles to be licensed.
The rules differ in specifics by jurisdiction but the themes are
the same. In practice, this means that most tokens are now
launched in core markets only initially, then expansion follows
as the project scales and has the bandwidth and funds to get
sign off for other countries.
There are now other ways in which you are kept on the
straight and narrow. Now that CEXs are subject to strict
money laundering rules and have regulators checking that
they are not securities exchanges without a licence, if you
want to list your token on an exchange (which investors will
want for the liquidity), the exchange will also check that the
token isn't a security. Investors often now also ask for the
same analysis and assurance. In practice, cutting a corner by
launching a token that is in breach of some regulation limits
your project’s ability to scale — when serious investors arrive,
they do checks and find the flaw and it’s a problem then.
This all means that there is some time and trouble now
involved in a token issuance that is for building. The most
common way in the UK now is for a project to take in equity
from angels or VCs and use that for building, but also have a
token in their roadmap and issue a token warrant (a right for
early investors to take tokens when they are issued) to the
equity investors. The token follows the set up and build.
This way also solves the other main issue that applies with
token issuances in the UK now. The UK regulator has limited
the ability to market tokens, including on social media. If you
can't tell people about your token, you can't get liquidity or
trading. These rules are called the financial promotions rules,
and they are explained elsewhere in this guide.


Page - 21 
So, what does that leave as options for tokenisation for early-
stage firms?
You can tokenise the equity in a UK company without too
much trouble. Rules on secondary trading of securities mean
that this on its own doesn't make a market. But, sometimes
projects do that to show their credentials as crypto projects.
You can be a true Ll blockchain, where the Bitcoin analysis
above applies. Your token could be for security and network
validation. But BTC took a long time to be valuable. And a
Bitcoin fork isn't valuable these days.
You can go for "sufficient decentralisation" but that takes
scale and money. Even well-known DeFi projects can have
relatively few large token holders and relatively few
validators. If a regulator sees this, they will argue the project
is not decentralised.
You can do a pure utility token. That means not raising
capital but giving features or services. As we say above, this
doesn't have to be at the very start of the project.
You can do a governance token. This could be a way to
engage with your community. But you need to be careful
that you don't mix up governance rights that shareholders
have in your company, governance over, say, technical
features of your codebase.
You can do your own design of a utility token. There are
some that are effectively loyalty programs, but they capture
community and engagement without promising mooning
returns. Some of those have then been expanded and
changed to share value, but only when the project has the
money and experience to handle the responsibilities that
come with that.
Top crypto investors like tokens. They think they are where
the value will accrue in the best projects. But they are hard
to impress on tech and even harder on tokenomics. You
need a true "category creation" project to win with them. So,
work on your plans for tokenisation but know that tokens
aren't the easy option, and they certainly aren't now free
money.

What is a Token Warrant?
(Anne Rose and Callum Blundell - Mishcon de Reya)
A Token Warrant functions as a promise that gives the holder
the right, but not the obligation, to purchase a set number of
digital tokens at a later date, for a price that's decided
upfront. The price is fixed in advance, so if the tokens do well
and their value goes up, you could bag a bargain! They work
in a similar way but there are key differences that set them
apart from traditional derivatives, like stock warrants.
Token Warrants usually pop up when a new blockchain
project is getting off the ground. When a company has an
exciting new idea and starts putting it together, but before
everything is up and running, it might offer token warrants to
hype up potential investors and raise some cash. Token
Warrants should not be confused with token incentive
schemes but may be offered to team members as well as
investors.
The Importance of Heads of Terms
As with any part of a funding round, it is extremely important
for the company and investors) to work together at the
outset to agree the heads of terms for the deal and, as part
of that, ensure they don't overlook the terms of any Token
Warrant to be issued. For example, agreeing a clear definition
of "Portion" (as discussed in more detail below) from the
beginning should ensure negotiations on the terms of the
Token Warrant go much more smoothly.
We often find Token Warrants are sidelined in the context of
larger equity or debt financing rounds, meaning important
provisions regarding Token Warrants are left out when
drafting heads of terms.

Page - 22 
This can have unintended consequences for the company,
for example, drafting the definition of "Portion" too widely
can lead to an oversupply of tokens which pushes down the
token's value.
Top Tips:
Defining the Portion of tokens that an investor is allocated
— the investor friendly approach is for the investor's
allocation of any given token (Portion) to be defined as a
fixed percentage of the total number of tokens created. This
is often set at the same percentage as the investor's equity
ownership in the company at the time of an investment
round. The key consideration here for the company is that
future investors may demand the same treatment as early
investors / token warrant holders and communities may also
have a negative perception of a project with tokens heavily
allocated to investors early on, which can therefore impact
future funding rounds.
The more company friendly compromise would be for the
Portion of token allocation to reflect the pro rata proportion
of the investor's equity ownership in the company at the time
of a token launch / generation event (which could be a lower
percentage than if a fixed percentage is agreed to at the time
of entering into the token warrant instead).
The definition of "Portion" will usually include a
further definition of "Pro Rata Share" reflecting the
percentage of the investor's equity ownership in
the company. Be wary that where an investor has
an unexercised stock warrant at the time of a
token launch / generation event (and the Pro Rata
Share is based on the investor's fully diluted equity
ownership), this should not artificially increase the
Pro Rata Share of the investor's Portion of tokens
allocated. The rationale for this is that the investor
may decide to never exercise the equity warrant!
Check the definition of "Excluded Tokens" - as well as a
definition of "Tokens", heads of terms should define "Excluded
Tokens" for example, tokens issued for development, testing
or experimental purposes or pursuant to activities like staking
(earning rewards by validating transactions on the
blockchain), rewards or inflationary or dilutive controls.
There is no benefit to an investor being issued these types of
tokens and failing to exclude them could have unwanted
consequences.
Reduce ambiguity - we often see references to intellectual
property and material intellectual property, but these terms
should be properly defined to avoid any ambiguity. It should
also be abundantly clear how certain processes, such as the
service of notices, are triggered.
Lockup Provisions - companies typically want to restrict
the transfer of tokens acquired under token warrants for a
certain period after the token launch. For example, a lockup
schedule preventing any transfers for 12 months after the
token launch date, releasing 50% of tokens from the one-
year mark then a gradual release of the remaining balance
over the next year or two. Lockups can encourage
cooperation between token holders, allow the broader
community a fair chance to snap up popular tokens, and can
include additional transfer restrictions to manage compliance
risks and regulatory requirements.
Most Favoured Nations Clause — a Most Favoured Nation
(MFN) clause is a provision often argued for by investors and
sometimes included in Token Warrants to ensure that the
investor receives equal treatment to that given to future
investors. In essence, if the company grants a future investor
a Token Warrant with better terms, benefits, or privileges, for
example a less restrictive lockup, these must also then be
extended to the earlier investor that is subject to the MFN
clause.
An MFN clause is market practice in the USA, if a bit
aggressive, but in the UK we have seen companies
successfully push back on an MFN clause so this should
ideally be ironed out at the heads of terms stage to prevent
investors sneaking it into the initial (or subsequent) drafts of
the Token Warrant.
Custodians - many investors will be keen to include a
provision that, following any token launch / generation event
(TGE), the company will partner with a high-quality custodian
(a third-party which looks after the tokens) which will accept
and support the tokens with secure wallet and storage
services promptly following such distribution. The company
should only agree to use commercially reasonable efforts in
such a scenario, as otherwise it runs the risk of being strong-
armed into partnering with a custodian on unfavourable
terms.

Page - 23 
Dispute Resolution - we have found that dispute resolution
provisions, which enable the parties to escalate disputes to
arbitration, are not as common in Token Warrants as they
ought to be.
While such provisions shouldn't prevent the parties from
taking a dispute to court entirely (for example, claims for
injunctive or equitable relief and claims relating to intellectual
property rights should be reserved for the court's jurisdiction)
it's often advisable, if the company is open to the alternative,
to include a dispute resolution clause rather than confining
the parties to pursuing claims through the courts only.

Product, Data and Compliance-by-Design
(Derya Karli - Own Protocol and
Lisa McClory - D2 Legal Technology)

"Compliance is your responsibility. If we find inadequate
controls in your firm, we may take action against you." -
UK Financial Conduct Authority
Data is a vital force for Web3 applications! It performs many
important tasks, including triggering smart contract
functions, allowing access to permissioned resources,
providing connections and information, underpinning
decentralised proof of trustworthiness, identity, ownership
and more. When building a Web3 application, you are
effectively building a home for all the data that will one day
live within your app, and this can be a complex area with
nuanced trade-offs to take into account, technical standards
and legal requirements, all against a shifting backdrop of
cyber risk factors. You may need to think carefully about your
house's rooms and facilities to cater properly to the needs of
its inhabitants!
By thinking about data governance and compliance right
from the start of your product design phase, you avoid
having to rewind and do an expensive rebuild when an app-
store or regulator later imposes requirements. Planning
around data law and security requirements also helps you to
manage compliance costs later in your project.
Why is Data Security and Governance Important in a
Web3 Context?
Web3 applications often act as store or record of value and
may perform important functions relating to the allocation of
resources or project governance. Data breach and
exploitation of security flaws can result in a particularly
heightened risk of financial losses, or potentially expose
people to severe risks of scams, theft and identity fraud.
Due to the nature of Web3 often involving novel and
innovative use of emerging technologies, whilst also pushing
the boundaries of what is possible when enabling
collaboration and shared networks, there are heightened
security and data breach risks.
The FCA recently surveyed consumer attitudes and
behaviours towards crypto, finding that consumer awareness
is now up to 93%, and only 1 in 10 people failed to do
research before buying cryptoassets. Consumers care about
security and data, as do regulators, and it is highly important
that your product is built on solid foundations of good data
governance practices.
Data Governance
Good data governance is an essential starting point for any
robust, reliable and trustworthy product.
14 FCA Finds Crypto Ownership Continues to Rise as It Delivers Plans to Regulate Crypto, Financial Conduct
Authority (26 November 2024)

Page - 24 
It is an approach to managing the availability, usability,
integrity, and security of data, including establishment of
policies, procedures, and standards that ensure data is
properly handled throughout its lifecycle. Good data
governance can not only protect against risks, but will also
help to streamline operations and enable better use of
automation, better scalability, and lower costs of data
storage: all very important factors to get right from the outset
of your project.
Effective data governance is therefore highly important to all
Web3 projects and should be something that developers
consider throughout the project lifecycle. Projects should
define clear roles for data management, implement data
classification and access controls, and ensure consistent
practices.
A solid working knowledge of data law, data ethics and
security best practices is important because:
• this is a regulatory obligation under the General Data
Protection Regulation in the EU and the UK;
• actively embedding good data governance and security
standards, including responsible data practices, will help
you to build a secure and robust product, bringing good
value to your ecosystem and community.
Training employees on these standards is also essential, as
their understanding directly impacts an organisation's ability
to safeguard sensitive information. Ultimately, robust data
governance enhances informed decision-making, improves
efficiency, and builds customer trust by demonstrating a
commitment to security and privacy.
Personal data is any information that directly or indirectly
identifies or relates to a natural person, including where it is
an identifier that identifies a person only indirectly, or when
aggregated with other pieces of information. It can include a
wide range of information and generally requires special
protection, e.g. name, personal ID records, user location
details and so on.
EU and UK GDPR are presently pretty much the same (at the
time of writing), as the UK retained a frozen version of the EU
GDPR following the UK's exit from the European Union (the
transition period ended on 31 December 2020). Alongside
the UK GDPR, the Data Protection Act 1998 still applies in the
UK, but is essentially only relevant for law enforcement and
intelligence services.
As the UK is no longer in the EU, the UK's approach to data
law is currently under review and a new Data Protection and
Digital Information Bill is being proposed. This Bill will clarify
and make provision for several important areas of the digital
economic environment, such as electronic signatures and
digital authentication, oversight of biometric data and general
rules about privacy of electronic communications. These new
requirements will be relevant to Web3 businesses in any
number of areas.
General Data Protection
Regulation
Types of Data
There is a key distinction between personal data and other
more general kinds of data or information.
Personal data requires particular attention because data laws,
such as the EU and UK General Data Protection Regulation
(EU) 2016/679 provide individuals with legal protection
whenever their personal data is processed. These regulations
reflect the fundamental human right to privacy enshrined in
human rights treaties, such as the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.
Data protection law is centred around certain core principles
which seek to ensure that personal data is processed lawfully,
fairly and in a transparent manner. The principles are:
• lawfulness, fairness and transparency: a general
principle that organisations usually manage by creating
data policies with disclosures of processing activities to
people whose data is processed, and by documenting
decisions around whether activities involving data are fair
and lawful;
• purpose limitation: collection and processing for
specified, explicit and legitimate purposes, e.g. not
collecting data for one reason, and then using it for
something very different and unexpected;
15Data Protection and Digital Information Bill, UK Parliament (23 September 2024)  Page 25  • data minimisation: ensuring that data is adequate,
relevant and limited to what is necessary for the purposes
of its processing;
• accuracy: taking every reasonable step to keep data
accurate and up-to-date and deleting or rectifying any
errors without delay;
• storage limitation: ensuring data is held for no longer
than is necessary. Relatedly, individuals also have a legal
right to request the erasure of their personal data (a 'right
to be forgotten'), and in some circumstances to withdraw
their consent to processing;
• integrity and confidentiality: data must be collected and
processed, stored and processed securely, ensuring
appropriate safeguards against accidental loss,
destruction or damage.
Transparency is one of the key features of Web3 technology.
This is useful because it allows people to access information
directly, without relying on intermediaries, and also because it
is possible to trace and recover assets in the event there is a
theft or a fraud. However, this transparency is also a
challenge for many Web3 projects when seeking to get the
right approach to privacy and user safety. Where persona
data is concerned, the notion of storing data permanently
onchain, where it can be accessed openly by any node or
person reviewing the ledger through a block explorer app, is
very difficult to reconcile with data laws, including the
principle of data minimisation.
Article 25 GDPR sets out the obligation of data protection by
design. This requires data controllers to implement
appropriate organisational and technical measures to
implement the data protection principles, including data
minimisation, in an effective way, as well as integrating
safeguards that meet data law requirements. This obligation
applies both at the outset, when determining how data will
be processed, and later at any time when data is actually
being processed.
1 Data Protection and Digital Information Bill (23 September 2024)
This requirement is to be interpreted in the circumstances of
each type of processing, and must take into account:
• the state of the art;
• the cost of implementation;
• the nature, scope, context and purposes of data
processing; and
• the risks of varying likelihood and severity for rights and
freedoms of natural persons by the processing.
Article 32 GDPR also sets out specific expectations for
security of data processing. This includes requirements for
the pseudonymisation and encryption of personal data, as
well as processes for the regular testing and evaluation of
technical and organisational security measures. 16 This
requirement under GDPR applies alongside other network
and information security obligations applicable to certain
digital service providers, including online marketplaces,
online search engines and cloud computing services under
the Network and Information Systems Regulations 2018.
Photo Credit: Ricardo Matos (www.Lummi.ai)

Page 26 
Key things to consider where your product will process personal data:
Data controllers must register
with the ICO
There is a small fee to pay and the form is easy to complete online. Details are
available on the ICO's website."
Decentralisation and data
governance?
Legal obligations apply to controllers and processors of personal data, each having a
different role and responsibility. This includes specific compliance steps, such as
preparing a Data Protection Impact Assessment.
In the context of decentralised organisations, it can be difficult to define who has the
role of controller or processor, and individuals may not have an easy way to establish
how their data is stored, who is responsible for data governance, or where they can
direct a query in the event there is any issue. Making adequate provision for data
governance and security within an app's design and build is a helpful way to resolve
ambiguities and prevent problems and disputes from arising.
Be especially careful of
sensitive personal data
Data protection by design
and security are highly
important
Ethical practices are
important too
GDPR provides particular protection to special categories of personal data which are
particularly sensitive. Special category data relates to: racial or ethnic origin, political
opinions, religious or philosophical beliefs, or trade union membership, and the
processing of genetic data, biometric data for the purpose of uniquely identifying a
natural person, data concerning health or data concerning a natural person's sex life
or sexual orientation. Processing of this type of data is only permitted under limited
circumstances and you should be especially careful to consider your legal obligations
where dealing with any special category data.
GDPR requires all data controllers to design their systems and processes for
compliance with data protection principles.
There are specific security requirements under GDPR and this is a big part of
ensuring compliance. You can find a security checklist® on the UK ICO's website as a
starting point, but this is a highly important area and requires detailed, specialist
attention. You should seek professional support as required.
By associating data about wallet owners from onchain and offchain digital sources, it
is possible for any third party to acquire a great deal of information about a person,
their online activity and assets they hold.
Even if your app does not directly hold personal data, take care to think about the
safety of users and put in place best practice measures to safeguard user data.
16 A Guide to Data Security, Information Commissioner's Office (last visited 03 December 2024)
" Data Protection Fee, Information Commissioner's Office (last visited 03 December 2024)
18 A Guide to Data Security, Information Commissioner's Office (last visited 03 December 2024)

Page 27 
Artificial Intelligence
Regulation
Increasingly, blockchain applications are using Al agents for
smart contract execution and algorithmic trading, amongst
other purposes. Developers should also be aware that new
Al regulations are gradually emerging, including the EU Al
Act (Regulation (EU) 2024/1689), which came into force on 1
August 2024. The Al Act creates a comprehensive
framework to regulate Al systems across the EU, and also
has some extra-territorial effect, e.g. where an Al system's
output is used in the EU.
Where it applies, the EU Al Act will prohibit certain
unacceptably high-risk Al practices, including - for example
- systems that employ subliminal or purposefully
manipulative or deceptive techniques with the objective or
effect of materially distorting a person's behaviour in a way
that is reasonably likely to cause them significant harm.
Other systems are classified as high risk, including many
uses of Al in a workplace setting, and some uses of biometric
data. There is also a requirement to provide users with
transparency that they are engaging with an Al system,
where the Al system generates synthetic audio, image, video
or text content (see Article 50 EU Al Act).
If your product uses Al in any area of your tech stack, ensure
to check whether Al regulations may apply and take
compliance steps accordingly.
Practical Data Governance through
the Product Lifecycle
Web3 involves many different technologies, and the
approach to data governance can vary depending on the
technology involved. In this section, we cover some key
things within different areas of the app build process that
you need to think about from a data governance and
compliance perspective.
When thinking about data governance in a Web3 context, it
is helpful to be aware of the following key concepts:

Page 28 
Data Classification:
Transaction data:
The state of a smart contract
Analytics and metrics
System logs
Involves categorising data based on sensitivity and regulatory requirements,
including classification of personal data or Personal Identifiable Information
(PIl), including online identifiers or identification numbers and other personal
information stored in any format, such as National Insurance records,
addresses, birthdates, family situations, banking information, and medical
histories.
Refers to users' activity across various services and accounts. This can include
the customer's transaction history, exchanges, withdrawals, transfers and
payments, including dates and amounts.
Refers to its current set of data and conditions at a specific point in time. This
includes the values of variables, balances, and any outcomes from
interactions with the contract. In essence, the state is a snapshot of the smart
contract's "memory" and how it behaves based on prior inputs and events.
Refer to the processes and tools used to measure, analyse, and interpret data
generated by systems, users, and transactions. These insights are used to
optimise performance, enhance decision-making, and monitor compliance
and security.
Are records generated by software or hardware systems that document events,
operations, and activities within the system. In the context of blockchain and
crypto projects, system logs provide critical information about how dApps,
nodes, or blockchain platforms are functioning. These logs are essential for
debugging, auditing, and ensuring operational transparency.

Page 29 
Managing Product Data Flow
1. Smart Contract State
When designing an app, a key area to consider is the
product’s data flow. Overall, the aim should be to ensure data
minimisation throughout the product's lifecycle, particularly
where it relates to any personal data/PIl.
Input data is a very important part of this, because you can
encrypt data before it goes onchain and this will reduce your
app’s data footprint and save you a lot of compliance worries
elsewhere in your project. Always hash data before putting it
onchain, and ensure to use a secure hashing algorithm with
adequate sources of randomness.
Transaction monitoring is not an obligatory thing to include,
but it is really important for your product’s internal controls. It
will allow you to keep an eye on malicious or risk-related
activity in your system and helps you manage risks.
Your product may require you to maintain oracle services. If
so, this could be a lot of work. Consider using tools (e.g.
chain.link) that help you manage data in a secure and
compliant way. Think carefully about the additional work
required to build your own oracle management solution and
weigh up the costs and benefits associated.
There are three key areas to consider when thinking about
data location:
¢ onchain data;
¢ offchain data;
e hybrid approaches.
Smart contract state represents the core variables and
conditions stored on the blockchain, defining the
functionality and outcomes of the contract. For example, a
token contract’s state might include user balances and supply
limits, while a DeFi protocol might store collateral ratios and
governance decisions.
To comply with data minimisation, developers should store
only essential variables directly in the contract and offload
non-critical data to offchain storage. Using event logs instead
of state updates can significantly reduce gas costs while
maintaining transparency, as events do not contribute to
contract storage. Additionally, implementing robust access
control mechanisms ensures that only authorised users or
entities can modify sensitive state variables. Regular
optimisation of smart contracts, such as batching multiple
updates into a single transaction, can further reduce storage
costs and improve scalability.
2. Transaction History
Onchain Data
Onchain data is a cornerstone of blockchain systems,
enabling transparency, security, and trustless operations.
However, its costs and limitations demand thoughtful design.
By strategically managing smart contract state, transaction
history, and public attestations, and by carefully analysing the
trade-offs of onchain storage, developers can build efficient,
scalable, and compliant Web3 systems.
Transaction history encompasses a detailed, immutable
record of all user activities, such as token transfers, staking
operations, and smart contract interactions. While transaction
history ensures traceability and accountability, developers
must anonymise data to prevent exposing sensitive user
information. Storing minimal metadata—such as transaction
amounts, timestamps, and wallet addresses—rather than
including personal identifiers or extraneous details is critical
for compliance. Aggregating transaction data or summarising
interactions can also help minimise storage requirements
while maintaining verifiability. For example, rollups or
batching mechanisms can summarise hundreds of
transactions into a single onchain update, reducing costs and
improving blockchain throughput. Cryptographic techniques
like Merkle proofs or zero-knowledge proofs (ZKPs) can be
employed to validate offchain transaction details onchain
without compromising user privacy.

Page 30 
. Public Attestations
Public attestations provide verifiable proof of actions, claims,
or ownership recorded on the blockchain. Examples include
identity verification, proof of ownership for NFTs, or
certifications of data integrity. While public attestations
enhance trust and transparency, they can inadvertently
expose sensitive information. To align with data minimisation
principles, developers should rely on hash-based attestations
where only a cryptographic hash is stored onchain, and the
underlying data is kept offchain. This approach ensures that
the data remains verifiable without exposing its contents.
Leveraging privacy-preserving technologies like ZKPs allows
users to share selective information for verification without
revealing unnecessary details. Decentralised Identifiers (DIDs)
and Verifiable Credentials are also effective solutions,
enabling offchain storage of attestations while maintaining
onchain verifiability.
4. Cost-Benefit Analysis of
Onchain Storage
Storing data onchain provides immutability, transparency,
and decentralisation but comes at a high cost, especially on
networks like Ethereum. To minimise costs, developers
should store only essential data directly onchain and use
offchain systems like IPFS or Arweave for large or sensitive
datasets. For example, instead of storing the metadata of an
NFT directly onchain, developers can store a hash that points
to its offchain location. Layer 2 scaling solutions like zkSync
or Optimism are valuable for reducing storage costs by
handling most data processing offchain and submitting only
summarised data to Layer 1. Periodic data pruning can help
archive outdated or inactive data offchain while retaining a
root hash for future validation. When designing systems,
evaluating lower-cost blockchains for less critical data
storage can further optimise operations. Balancing these
considerations ensures efficient use of onchain storage
without compromising functionality or compliance.
Offchain Data
e Private User Information
Storing personal data offchain is essential to comply with
privacy regulations like GDPR and to safeguard users
from identity theft or breaches. To protect private user
information, projects should use encrypted databases and
ensure robust access control mechanisms. By offloading
this data to secure storage, only references or hashed
pointers to the data need to be stored onchain,
maintaining compliance without compromising user
privacy.
KYC/AML Documentation
Know Your Customer (KYC) and Anti-Money Laundering
(AML) requirements necessitate the storage of detailed
user verification documents, such as government-issued
IDs or proof of address. Storing these large, sensitive data
sets offchain reduces costs and prevents unnecessary
exposure on the blockchain. Using decentralised identity
frameworks, such as Decentralised Identifiers (DIDs),
allows projects to store KYC/AML data securely offchain
while enabling selective onchain verification for
compliance checks without revealing sensitive
information.
Large Datasets
Blockchain systems are not designed to handle large
datasets such as media files, logs, or complex analytical
reports. Storing such data offchain on platforms like IPFS
or Arweave reduces costs and ensures scalability. For
example, an NFT project might store high-resolution
images or videos on IPFS, while retaining only the IPFS
hash onchain to link the data for verification.
System Configuration
System configurations, such as application settings,
network preferences, and smart contract deployment
parameters, are better stored offchain for flexibility and
security. This ensures that changes to configurations can
be managed dynamically without requiring costly onchain
updates. Storing configuration files in secure, centralised
systems or encrypted offchain databases is a practical
solution for managing this type of data.
Analytics and Reporting Data
Analytical insights and reports, such as user behaviour
metrics, transaction patterns, or performance logs, are
typically too voluminous for onchain storage.

Page 31 
Projects can store these data sets offchain in dedicated data
warehouses or analytic platforms like Google BigQuery or
AWS Redshift. By integrating these tools with blockchain
data, projects can perform advanced analytics and generate
reports without burdening the blockchain's storage.
Hybrid Solutions
The following hybrid approaches can offer developers a
choice when balancing different concerns of data privacy, vs
security and efficiency:
• Merkle Proofs for Data Verification
Merkle proofs allow developers to verify offchain data
integrity without storing the full dataset onchain. A Merkle
tree generates a cryptographic root hash from multiple
pieces of data, enabling verification of any single piece by
comparing its hash to the root. For example, a supply chain
dApp can store transactional data offchain while using
Merkle proofs onchain to validate individual records.
• IPFS Integration Patterns
IPFS (InterPlanetary File System) is a decentralised file
storage system ideal for offloading large files while
maintaining onchain verifiability. Projects can store metadata,
images, or other bulky content on IPFS and reference the file
using its unique hash onchain. To ensure data persistence,
developers can use services like Pinata or Filecoin to
maintain file availability on IPFS.
• Zero-Knowledge Proof Implementations
Zero-knowledge proofs (ZKPs) enable the verification of
offchain data without revealing the underlying information.
For example, ZKPs can confirm that a user has passed a KYC
check without exposing their personal details. By integrating
ZKP frameworks like zk-SNARKs or zk-STARKs, developers
can enhance privacy while maintaining compliance and trust
in their systems. (e.g. ZK IDi% and zkTLS20 solutions for
onchain compliance).
• Layer 2 Scaling Solutions
Layer 2 solutions such as Optimism, Arbitrum, or zkSync
process transactions and data offchain while periodically
posting summaries or proofs on the Layer 1 blockchain. This
approach reduces storage and transaction costs significantly
while retaining the security and trust of the main blockchain.
For example, a DeFi protocol can manage user balances and
interactions offchain on a Layer 2 network, submitting only
essential final state updates onchain.
19 ZK Identity: Why and How (Part 1), OxPARC (last visited 03 December)
20 Oracles vs. Web Proofs: A Comparison, vLayer (23 September 2024)
Tools and Compliance Management
Efficient data management and compliance tools are vital for
Webs builders to handle data securely, streamline operations,
and meet regulatory requirements. Developers can enhance
system performance, ensure scalability, and minimise risks by
leveraging specialised tools for data management,
monitoring, and compliance automation. This section
provides an overview of key tools and strategies for
compliance management in blockchain projects.
Data Management Tools
• Blockchain Indexers and Query Layers
Blockchain indexers and query layers simplify accessing
and analysing onchain data. Tools like The Graph,
Etherscan APls, and Alchemy Enhanced APls allow
developers to efficiently query transaction histories, smart
contract states, and logs without interacting directly with
the blockchain's raw data. These tools enable real-time
insights and significantly reduce the complexity of data
retrieval, making them essential for analytics, compliance
reporting, and debugging.
• Database Compliance Capabilities: Databases must
support data encryption, role-based access control, and
audit logs to ensure compliance with regulations like
GDPR or CCPA. Platforms such as Google Cloud SQL
and AWS offer built-in compliance features.
• Monitoring and Alerting Systems
Monitoring and alerting tools ensure blockchain systems
remain secure and operational. Tools like Prometheus,
Grafana, and New Relic provide real-time tracking of
system health, resource usage, and anomalies. These
tools are invaluable for detecting failed transactions,
excessive gas usage, or potential breaches. Alerts can be
configured to notify developers immediately when
irregular patterns are identified, enabling faster resolution
of critical issues.
• Compliance Automation
Compliance often requires periodic reporting of
transaction histories, user data usage, and system
performance. Automated tools like Chainalysis, Elliptic, or
Blocknative generate reports for anti-money laundering
(AML) compliance, tax reporting, and regulatory filings.
These systems reduce manual effort and minimise errors,
ensuring timely and accurate submissions.  Page - 32 
• Audit Trail Maintenance
Audit trails are essential for tracking system changes, user
activity, and data interactions. Immutable logs maintained
through blockchain or external systems like Splunk or
Graylog ensure traceability and accountability. Developers
should design systems to log all critical events, such as
smart contract upgrades, access attempts, and
configuration changes, to create a comprehensive audit
trail for compliance and debugging.
• Data Access Logging
Data access logging tracks who accessed sensitive data,
when, and for what purpose. This is critical for
maintaining user privacy and complying with regulations
like GDPR and HIPAA. Logging solutions such as AWS
CloudTrail or Azure Monitor allow developers to
implement robust access logs for offchain storage
systems. These tools also support alerting for
unauthorised access attempts, helping to mitigate risks in
real time.
• Incident Response Procedures
Incident response procedures outline steps to address
and resolve security breaches, data loss, or system
failures. Developers should integrate automated systems
to detect anomalies and initiate predefined response
actions. Tools like PagerDuty or Opsgenie help
coordinate responses, while blockchain-specific incident
response frameworks can implement mechanisms like
smart contract "pauses" to prevent further damage
during an exploit. Regular testing and simulation of
response procedures ensure readiness for real-world
incidents.
The pace of algorithmic development is increasing, and the
timings of technological breakthroughs are unpredictable.
This is a present and not just a theoretical issue, and updates
to the NIST security standards are in progress, due for
publication in Q4 2024. This is a big and growing area of
focus. Effective risk management includes making provision
for disaster response and recovery processes in the event of
a brute force attack on your PKI (Public Key Infrastructure)!
Follow NIST and keep a close watch on standards updates
as a priority for your product security.
54%
Post-Quantum Security and
Technical Standards
Although this guide gives an introduction to some of the data
governance and security considerations when building
compliance into your product, this is a fast-moving area with
many aspects to explore further, including smart contract
security and also the risks of quantum algorithms.
Photo Credit Love Kang the Ngui rinsplash.com
Quantum, particularly when combined with Al, is a known
upcoming threat to encryption technology, and it is expected
that the encryption landscape could materially change at any
time, and certainly by 2035.
amaranth
21NIST Internal Report 8547 (Initial Public Draft), National Institute of Standards and Technology (November 2024)

Computable Contracts (Akber Datoo - D2 Legal
Technology and Co-Chair, Law Society of England
and Wales Technology and Law Committee) - Page 33
We are on an inevitable journey towards data-orientated
contracts, with a meaningful representation of the written
contractual terms in a manner that follows a consistent,
predictable and structured data format. This paves the way for
automation in an increasingly digital world, with a promise of
business value through smart legal contracts in sight.
The format of contracts that best suits human to human
communications requires a radical overhaul if contracts are to
be fit for the coming Webé era.
Organisations increasingly operate through processes and
systems (both of which may be efficient and organised, or
not!) and this reaches its pinnacle in respect of global,
decentralised autonomous organisations (DAOs).
The role of agreements is to document a commercial
understanding that is important, perhaps because two parties
have divergent commercial interests and cannot trust one
another. However, smart legal agreements operate in a world
where resource governance can be hardwired into protocols
and smart contracts, and shared networks provide a trust-
engine that shifts the role of contracts into something more
machine-led. Contracts need to be capable of being split
down into clear logical statements so that a smart contract
action can be triggered, (or at least something sufficiently
structured to be capable of being reliably plotted on an Al-
driven probabilistic journey towards that binary classification).
We often forget that in traditional (analogue) contracts, there
are many areas of contractual imprecision, such as allowance
for reasonableness or contractual discretion. These exist
intentionally and fulfil a crucial role in traditional contracts,
because parties cannot know at the outset all of the variables
that might affect their relationship during its course, and
rather than precisely drafting for all possible sets of
circumstances (which would of course be impracticable and
uneconomical), the parties set out tramlines to ensure that
categories of unexpected happenings are dealt with
according to specified processes.
Up to now, this has never been possible because we did not
have programmatic assets, or any way of sharing a store of
information that was robust against one party with access
simply changing the records. BTC, ETH and other subsequent
network innovations changed all of that. In this data-powered
world, the trade-off for friendly bargaining, gentleman’s
agreements, discretion and contractual comfort-language is
objectivity, speed, efficiency, global scale — which equates to
power.
The oft-cited comparison to the industrial revolution rings true:
smart contracts and networks bring the same sort of velocity
and power to transactional processes as did the invention of
steam and the combustion engine.
Much in the way that the invention of writing powered the
global expansion of not just knowledge, but also collaboration
and coordination (Yuval Noah Harari - Nexus), so contracts are
the lawyer-code that up to now has allowed human-to-human
organisations and structured collaborations of all kinds to
proliferate.
In the digital future, data will necessarily be the medium
through which contracts are powered. To move from current
paper and MS Word-based contracts to those which allow for
the automation and application of the data elements, meaning
must be given to the structured data variables and allowable
values of those variables. Huge advancement in Al technology
allows humans to glimpse inside the intricate web of smart
contracts and aids explainability (if it is correctly configured to
do so). Al can sort unstructured data into insights suitable for
ingestion by smart legal agreements, thereby expanding
information networks’ access to the universe outside of the
code-environment.
Global information networks present a change to the core
essence of collaboration, which is that protocols allow
sufficient sophistication of automaticity that they enable
strangers to enter into structured, rule-based arrangements
with one another at scale.
This is an exciting time for the evolution of the legal profession
into a new format that allows forward-thinking lawyers to
interact and engage with these powerful ecosystem-based
networks, to evolve the craft of contractual drafting into
something new and tech-enabled. This evolution in human
ability to collaborate is crucially essential if we are to meet the
challenges around resource shortage, climatic disruption, war
and instability of the present era. The role of lawyers is about to
change for the better. We can finally focus on solving the
societal and business problems, rather than the legal
component of such problems.

Page - 34 
Navigating Legal Architectures: Building your Web3
Project on Solana in the UK (Marcus Bagnall - Wiggin)
The Solana blockchain offers UK developers a high-speed,
low-cost platform that’s ripe for innovation. Whether you’re
tokenising real-world assets, crafting DeFi protocols,
launching NFT art collections, developing cutting-edge
games, building decentralised exchanges (DEX), or creating
identity authentication systems, understanding the legal
architecture is crucial. By carefully considering your legal
architecture, you lay a strong foundation that supports
innovation, growth, and compliance.
The Web3 legal landscape can seem as complex as the
technology itself. But fear not—this chapter demystifies the
legal structures available, tailoring insights specifically for UK-
based projects on Solana. We'll explore entity types,
structural considerations, project-specific suggestions and
offer guidance to balance ambition with pragmatism.
Remember, the right legal structure doesn’t just protect you
from pitfalls; it propels your project forward. It’s about
crafting a framework that aligns with your vision, resonates
with your community, and withstands the scrutiny of
regulators and investors alike.
Choosing the Right Legal Entity:
Laying the Foundation
The Uk’s legal system provides a variety of entity types
suitable for Web3 projects. Selecting the appropriate one is
like choosing the right programming language—each has its
strengths and quirks.
Private Limited Company (Ltd) - the developer’s favourite
A Private Limited Company is the go-to choice for many
startups, and for good reason:
e Corporate identity: A Private Limited Company enables
the project to enter contracts, own assets, and hire
employees under a legally recognised entity. This
professional structure is essential when dealing with
partners, regulators, or customers. Additionally, Ltd
companies can issue shares to incentivise key personnel
or reward early contributors.
e Limited liability: Shareholders’ liability is limited to the
capital they have invested. This separation of personal
and corporate assets is essential in Web3, where
regulatory uncertainty and rapid technological changes
pose inherent risks. If the company fails or faces legal
challenges, personal assets of founders and investors
remain safe.
e Investor appeal: The Ltd structure is familiar to venture
capitalists, angel investors, and institutional backers. It
provides governance transparency and clear ownership
rights, making fundraising more accessible. Shareholders
benefit from established legal protections, ensuring their
investments are safeguarded.
Ideal for: Projects seeking external investment and rapid
scaling. If you're planning to raise funds, a Ltd company is
often the smoothest path.
Limited Liability Partnership (LLP) - collaboration central
An LLP combines partnership flexibility with limited liability
protection:
e Flexible profit distribution: Unlike companies, LLPs allow
partners to determine how profits are distributed,
regardless of their ownership stake. This is beneficial in
scenarios where contributions vary significantly—for
example, one partner provides capital while another
contributes tech skills or business development.
e Tax transparency: LLPs are tax-transparent entities,
meaning profits are taxed as personal income for
partners rather than at a corporate level. This avoids
double taxation seen in companies, where profits are
taxed first as corporate income and then as dividends for
shareholders.
¢ Collaborative vibes: LLPs are often used in professional
services or collaborative ventures, making them suitable
for blockchain developer collectives, consultancies, or
research consortia. Each partner contributes according to
their expertise or resources, fostering a cooperative
environment.  Page - 35 
deal for: Teams where members contribute differently but
want shared control, like consulting firms, developer
collectives, or joint ventures between established entities.
General Partnership - simplicity with a side of risk
Easy to set up but comes with unlimited liability:
e Minimal formalities: Setting up a general partnership is
quick and requires minimal legal paperwork. Partners can
begin operations almost immediately, making it suitable
for short-term or exploratory projects.
e Shared liability: Partners share profits and liabilities
equally unless otherwise agreed. However, each partner
is personally liable for all debts and obligations, which
can lead to significant personal risk if the venture incurs
losses or faces legal claims.
¢ Quick exit: General partnerships can be dissolved
relatively easily, making them a low-commitment option
for temporary ventures.
Ideal for: Small projects or temporary collaborations with
trusted partners, perhaps in the initial exploration or proof-
of-concept phase of a Web3 idea.
Trusts - guardians of assets
Trusts hold assets for beneficiaries:
¢ Asset shielding: Trusts can hold tokens, intellectual
property, or other critical assets separate from your
operational entity. This separation shields assets from
operational risks, such as litigation or insolvency, ensuring
their availability for beneficiaries.
e Privacy and control: Trusts can offer anonymity for
beneficiaries. Trusts can also be structured to enforce
specific governance rules, such as distributing royalties or
allocating tokens according to specific rules.
e« Complex but effective: Establishing a trust involves some
legal complexities, including drafting trust deeds and
appointing trustees. Managing the trust requires ongoing
oversight, which can be expensive and time-consuming.
But for projects with valuable assets, it can be worth it.
Ideal for: Projects needing to safeguard assets, perhaps in
NFT or gaming projects where IP rights are paramount or to
protect valuable assets in a non-Web3 component of a
project.
Tailoring Legal Structures to your
Web3 Project
One size doesn’t fit all in Web3. As Web3 projects are
diverse, the legal structure that works for one may be
unsuitable for another. Each project type has unique
operational, legal, and regulatory considerations, requiring a
tailored approach to entity formation, governance, and
compliance. Your project’s nature influences the optimal legal
structure.
Real-World Assets (RWA) - Tokenising the Tangible
Legal Challenges: Ensuring token ownership represents
legal ownership of the physical asset requires bridging the
gap between blockchain technology and traditional real and
personal property laws. Contracts must explicitly define
rights, liabilities, and remedies, ensuring enforceability in
both digital and physical realms. Regulatory complexities
arise if the asset is fractionalised or tokenised into securities.
Without clear legal frameworks, token holders may lack
enforceable claims to the underlying assets.
Regulatory Compliance: Depending on the jurisdiction,
tokenising RWAs may require adherence to property laws,
securities laws, and financial regulations. For example,
platforms tokenising real estate need to ensure compliance
with land registration requirements in the relevant country.
Failure to comply with these laws could invalidate token-
holder rights or expose the project to enforcement actions.
Example: A Solana-based platform tokenising real estate
could use a UK company for development, if the real estate is
in the UK then the structure could involve relevant UK entities
holding title to land, and an offshore structure to issue
tokens, facilitating compliance with requirements under UK
laws and offshore crypto regulations.
Decentralised Finance (DeFi) - navigating regulatory
rapids
e Regulatory Scrutiny: DeFi projects often intersect with
financial services regulations related to securities,
derivatives, lending, or trading. Depending on the
jurisdiction, tokens or activities might fall under complex
frameworks regarding cryptoasset services, financial
services and money laundering regulations. Projects
operating without regard for these regulations face
significant enforcement risks and reputational damage.  Page - 36 
e Compliance Programs: Implement robust KYC/AML
policies and transaction monitoring, even in unregulated
environments. This not only builds trust with users but
prepares the project for potential future regulatory shifts.
Early adoption of compliance measures positions the
project as trustworthy and resilient to regulatory
evolution.
Example: A UK-based team develops a lending protocol on
Solana. Governance tokens are issued by an offshore entity,
navigating favourable regulatory conditions while keeping
development operations separate.
Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) and Gaming - protecting
creativity and play
e IP Rights: Intellectual property ownership is critical in NFT
and gaming projects. Ambiguities in IP rights can lead to
disputes, eroding user and creator trust. Agreements
must clarify the ownership of digital art, in-game assets,
and user-generated content. Smart contracts can
automate royalty payments but must align with applicable
laws.
e Consumer Protection Laws: Digital goods and services,
such as in-game purchases or NFT sales, are subject to
consumer protection laws. Platforms must ensure
transparent pricing, refund policies, and compliance with
consumer protection regulations. Non-compliance risks
reputational damage and enforcement actions.
Example: An NFT marketplace ensures artists retain rights
through smart contracts and legal agreements. A UK
company manages the platform, enforcing IP rights and
ensuring compliance with UK consumer laws.
Decentralised Infrastructure - building the backbone
e Operational Considerations: Decentralised infrastructure
projects, such as those focusing on storage or compute,
involve network participants who may operate globally.
Clear legal frameworks must govern participant
relationships and data usage. Without these frameworks,
disputes between network participants could disrupt
operations.
Example: A decentralised storage network on Solana uses a
UK company to develop software, while tokens are issued by
an offshore foundation to support network decentralisation.
Location, Location, Location: Team
and Market Considerations
Where your team operates from, and the market you’re
targeting, can significantly influence the legal and
operational architecture of your Web3 project. Each of these
factors comes with specific legal and practical considerations
that affect compliance, tax efficiency, and operational
viability.
Team Location - The Heartbeat of Your Project
e Employment Laws: UK employment contracts must
adhere to statutory requirements, including working
hours, minimum wage, holiday entitlements, and statutory
benefits like sick pay. Misclassifying employees as
contractors to avoid these obligations can result in
penalties, lawsuits, or reputational damage.
Comprehensive contracts with clear terms of
engagement and IP assignment clauses are essential to
protect both the company and employees. Non-
compliance with employment laws can disrupt operations
and lead to costly legal disputes.
e Tax Residency: Corporate tax residency is typically
determined by the location of the company’s central
management and control. Regular board meetings held
in the UK, with directors making key decisions locally, can
establish UK tax residency. However, if critical decisions
are made elsewhere, it could shift tax residency to that
jurisdiction, creating dual taxation risks. Ensuring clarity
about where the company is liable for corporate tax and
help avoid unexpected tax bills.
e Global Teams: A distributed team introduces operational
complexity, including compliance with diverse local
employment laws, handling cross-border payments, and
navigating tax liabilities for remote workers. Time zone
differences and language barriers can also affect
productivity and team cohesion. Employer-of-record
services or local entities can simplify compliance with
foreign employment regulations.
e Token Economics: Projects must ensure compliance with
laws governing utility tokens versus securities.
Misclassifying a utility token could lead to enforcement
actions, fines, or investor claims. Proper classification
protects the project from regulatory risks.
Tip: Efficiently managing a global workforce reduces
administrative burdens and ensures compliance with local
laws. For globally distributed teams, consider setting up
entities in key jurisdictions or using employer-of-record
services to manage payroll and compliance. Be mindful of
the costs and administrative overhead involved.

The Paper Trail: Essential
Documents - Page 37
Setting up your project isn’t just about code— it’s about
contracts.
Pre-incorporation Documents - laying the groundwork
Founders’ Agreement: This document establishes clarity
among the founding team. It outlines the roles,
responsibilities, equity splits, and IP assignments among the
founding team. It’s crucial to establish expectations and
prevent disputes. It also addresses what happens if a
founder exits or fails to meet their obligations. Key clauses
include decision-making processes, vesting schedules for
equity, and dispute resolution mechanisms.
Non-Disclosure Agreements (NDAs): NDAs safeguard
sensitive information shared during early-stage discussions.
Protects sensitive information during discussions with
potential partners, investors, or team members before formal
agreements are in place. It should specify what information is
considered confidential, the duration of the confidentiality
obligation, and remedies for breaches.
Corporate Governance Documents - steering the ship
Articles of Association: A foundational document that sets
out the rules for running the company. It defines the rules for
decision-making, share issuance, and director powers.
Customisation is essential for Web3 projects to address
unique governance needs, such as token voting rights or
alternative dispute resolution mechanisms.
Shareholders’ Agreement: This agreement supplements the
Articles by defining the rights and obligations of
shareholders. It covers areas like decision-making authority,
minority protections, exit strategies, and how disputes
between shareholders are resolved. It protects investors’ and
founders’ interests, especially as the company grows and you
bring on external parties and investors.
Employment and Contractor Agreements - building the
team
Director Service Agreements: These agreements formalise
the relationship between the company and its directors. They
detail roles, responsibilities, confidentiality, and remuneration,
including equity or token allocations. Clauses may also
address conflicts of interest and termination procedures.
Employment Contracts: For staff based in the UK, these
contracts must comply with employment laws, including
minimum wage, leave entitlements, and dismissal rights. They
should also include IP assignment clauses, ensuring any work
product created by employees belongs to the company.
Contractor Agreements: Clearly defined agreements with
contractors are essential, especially in global Web3 teams.
These documents specify the scope of work, deliverables,
payment terms, and ownership of any IP created. They
should also address the contractor’s status as an
independent entity to avoid misclassification.
Intellectual Property Documents - protecting your
creations
IP Assignment Agreements: These agreements transfer
ownership of intellectual property created by founders,
employees, or contractors to the company. Without this, the
company might not legally own key assets, which could deter
investors or lead to disputes.
Trademark Registrations: Protects your brand name, logo,
and other identifiers from being used by others diluting your
brand or creating confusion in the market. In Web3, this is
particularly important for project names, platforms, and token
branding.
Patent Applications: If your project involves novel technical
solutions (e.g., unique consensus algorithms or cryptographic
methods), filing patents can provide exclusive rights and give
you a competitive edge. The application process can be
lengthy and complex, requiring thorough documentation.
Commercial Agreements - engaging with the world
Terms of Service and Privacy Policies: Essential for any
platform interacting with users to protects the company from
user disputes and ensure compliance with legal
requirements. Terms of Service define user rights and
obligations, while Privacy Policies ensure compliance with
data protection laws like GDPR. These documents should
address liability limitations, user data usage, and dispute
resolution.
Licensing Agreements: These agreements are critical if your
project involves licensing IP, such as that required for
software. It can be used to generate revenue streams and
prevent misuse of your IP or software. They specify the terms
of use, royalties, and restrictions on sublicensing or
modifications.

Page - 38 
Partnership Agreements: Collaboration with other projects
or entities requires clearly defined partnership terms to
ensure all parties have a shared understanding of the
collaboration and mitigates risks of disputes. These
agreements typically cover roles, revenue-sharing, joint IP
ownership, and exit strategies.
Intercompany Agreements - connecting the dots
Service Agreements: Define the services provided between
entities, such as a UK DevCo providing development or
operational support to an offshore foundation. These
agreements should include fee structures, performance
metrics, and dispute resolution mechanisms. These are
critical to establishing clear roles and ensuring intercompany
transactions meet regulatory and tax requirements.
IP Licensing Agreements: Define the services provided
between entities, such as a UK DevCo providing
development or operational support to an offshore
foundation. These agreements should include fee structures,
performance metrics, and dispute resolution mechanisms.
Practical Guidance and
Recommendations
Building on Solana in the UK is an adventure worth
embarking on, but with an eye on the legal compass.
1. Start simple, think big - lean structures with growth
potential
Begin with a straightforward UK Ltd company to minimise
costs and administrative burdens. This structure is well-
understood, easy to set up, and suitable for early-stage
projects focusing on development. As your project grows,
you can consider adding offshore entities or more complex
structures to address specific needs like token issuance or
international expansion.
Tip: Avoid overcomplicating your structure at the outset.
Complexity adds costs and can divert attention from building
your product.
2. Protect your intellectual property - safeguard your
creations
Ensure all IP created by founders, employees, and
contractors is owned by the company with clear IP
assignment agreements. Register trademarks and consider
patents if applicable. Protecting your IP not only secures your
competitive advantage but also enhances your project's
valuation in the eyes of investors.
Tip: Regularly audit your IP assets and ensure that all
necessary protections, registrations and renewals are up to
date.
3. Engage early with professionals - invest in expertise
Consult legal professionals experienced in blockchain and
crypto to receive tailored advice. Similarly, consult
accountants and tax advisors to optimise your structure for
tax efficiency and compliance. These experts can help you
navigate regulatory changes, draft robust contracts, and
prevent costly mistakes.
Tip: Consider joining industry groups or networks where you
can access shared resources and recommendations for
trusted advisors.
4. Stay informed and adaptive - the only constant is change
The Web3 legal landscape is evolving rapidly. Keep abreast
of developments in regulations, best practices, and industry
standards. Participate in industry events, webinars, and
forums. Engage with the broader Solana and Web3
communities to stay connected and informed.
Tip: Assign someone on your team to monitor regulatory
updates and assess their impact on your project.
5. Budget wisely - plan for the road ahead
Create a realistic budget that accounts for legal and
compliance costs. While it’s tempting to minimise expenses,
skimping on legal matters can lead to greater costs down the
line. Balance the need for compliance with your resource
constraints. Prioritise essential legal work and consider
phased approaches to implementing more complex
structures.
Tip: Explore grant programs, accelerators, or incubators that
may offer legal support as part of their services.
6. Embrace transparency - build trust through openness
Operate with transparency in your governance, tokenomics,
and compliance efforts. This builds trust with users, investors,
and regulators. Publish clear terms of service, privacy
policies, and disclaimers. Be upfront about risks and how
you're addressing them.
Tip: Consider open-sourcing parts of your codebase to foster
community engagement and demonstrate commitment to
the Web3 ethos.
7. Leverage the Solana ecosystem - strength in community
The Solana ecosystem offers resources, partnerships, and
support. Engage with Solana-focused developer groups,
forums, and events. Collaborate with other projects to share
knowledge and potentially pool resources for common legal
challenges

Page - 39 
Decentralised Autonomous Organisations
(Professor Sarah Green - D2 Legal Technology)
A Decentralised Autonomous Organisation (DAO) is an entity or organisation represented by rules encoded as a computer
program, typically on a blockchain. Unlike traditional organisations, DAOs operate without centralised leadership, relying
instead on smart contracts and collective decision-making.
in which decision-making is more concentrated, or has a
single point of focus. Particularly in the early days of a DAO’s
existence, during its set up phase, when there are many
decisions to make, decision-making may be limited to a small
group before rights are distributed over time in what
becomes, effectively, “progressive decentralisation.” An
inherent risk of a structure of this kind is of course the
potential for the concentration of power in any individual who
retains or accumulates large numbers of tokens with
corresponding voting power. If truly decentralised decision-
making power is to be achieved or retained, significant
thought should be given as to how best to guard against this
sort of concentration of voting power.
Key Characteristics
Decentralisation: No central authority;
decision-making Is distributed.
Autonomy: Operates based on smart
contracts, executing actions automatically
when conditions are met.
Transparency: Transactions and decisions
are recorded on a blockchain, visible to all
members.
Community Governance: Members vote
on proposals and decisions using
governance tokens.
Governance
DAOs facilitate a communal approach to governance, in
contrast to conventional arrangements that rely on a
centralised authority or management team. This means of
decision-making is often conducted by the distribution of
governance tokens. These tokens can be issued in fungible
or non-fungible form and have the effect of granting voting
powers or rights to those who hold them. In turn, governance
smart contracts provide a means by which those members of
a DAO who hold the governance tokens in question can
propose and vote on operational and architectural decisions.
Similar governance smart contracts can also be set up in
order to make treasury decisions, to manage the issuance,
distribution and buyback of tokens (where applicable), and to
register new members.
Whilst decentralised decision-making can be nighiy
beneficial in meeting the objectives, and matching the ethos,
of organisations and their rounders, it comes with potential
drawbacks, all of which should be borne in mind at the
outset. For instance, token-based governance of the sort
described above might mean that the making of decisions is

Page 40 - 
in which decision-making is more concentrated, or has a
single point of focus. Particularly in the early days of a DAO's
existence, during its set up phase, when there are many
decisions to make, decision-making may be limited to a small
group before rights are distributed over time in what
becomes, effectively, "progressive decentralisation." An
inherent risk of a structure of this kind is of course the
potential for the concentration of power in any individual who
retains or accumulates large numbers of tokens with
corresponding voting power. If truly decentralised decision-
making power is to be achieved or retained, significant
thought should be given as to how best to guard against this
sort of concentration of voting power.
In Legal Terms, what is a DAO?
It is important to recognise that, as a matter of English law,
there is no discrete legal concept of a DAO. As a
consequence, there exist important questions about the
proper legal characterisation of any particular DAO, and,
consequently, the relationships between various participants
in such arrangements. This means that there is less certainty
about the content of members' legal rights and obligations
than there would be in a conventional entity that has a
recognised legal form. One option, however, is for a DAO to
adopt traditional, legally-recognised organisational
structures, such as a limited company, a partnership model,
an offshore trust or foundation. It is also possible to adopt a
DAO-specific legal entity (which have recently been
introduced in some jurisdictions), or a combination of several
of these options. The entity chosen could either be co-
extensive with the DAO, or alternatively used only for a
specific function, such as to employ developers, or to hold
off chain property. This is known as "wrapping". It is crucial
to note, however, that if the DAO is only partially "wrapped"
in a legal entity, this might give rise to questions about the
nature of the relationship between the legal entity and the
non-wrapped part of the DAO, and about the legal
characterisation of the elements that do not form part of, or
come under, the wrapper. Where a legal entity has been
adopted in any capacity, the legal entity or entities in
question will be subject to the usual legal, tax and regulatory
requirements of the jurisdiction in which they are set up.
Where a DAO has taken no active steps to set up a legal
entity; that is, and/or where no thought has been given to the
members' collective legal status, any legal intervention that is
required will need to start by working out retrospectively what
the legal status of the arrangement is.
This can be a difficult (and therefore costly) exercise,
especially if the DAO does not fit easily within existing
structures that can arise as a matter of law, such as general
partnerships or unincorporated associations. What a
particular DAO is from a legal perspective will determine
much about the way it is treated by the law, including the
rules for its operation, the liability of its participants, and how
it can interact with the real world concepts of contracts,
property, and tax. DAOs that have taken active steps to
include a recognised legal entity within their structure are
therefore very different from those that have not. Wrapped
DAOs therefore arguably have a greater ability to transact in
the "real world" and to do so in a way that allows their
members to predict the consequences of those transactions.
It may be necessary, for instance, to characterise the legal
relationship between various actors within a DAO to
determine who is liable if something goes wrong.
What happens, for example, when actions by or on behalf of
the DAO give rise to liability in tort (such as negligence), or if
there are any regulatory breaches or criminal conduct? If and
when this happens, the law will need to establish who or
what is responsible for the actions of the DAO. Such an
analysis could conclude that all or certain participants within
a DAO are part of a general partnership or unincorporated
association, or alternatively to have a contractual or agency
relationship with other parties. This could mean that
individual participants have personal liability for the actions of
the DAO. For example, in a general partnership, all partners
are jointly liable for the debts and obligations of the
partnership. If, however, a DAO has used as a wrapper a
formal legal entity such as a company with a "legal
personality" separate from that of its participants, the
answers to the questions posed here are likely to be more
straightforward because the DAO itself will shoulder much of
the burden since, as a legal person, it can hold property,
enter into contracts and sue and be sued in its own name.
Practical Steps to set up and use a DAO
1. Define the Purpose of your particular DAO
Determine what you want to achieve with the DAO (e.g.,
funding, governance, development).
2. Choose the Blockchain Platform
Factors to consider:
High-speed transactions?
Mature ecosystem with numerous DAO tools?
Lower transaction costs?

Page 41 -  3. Develop Smart Contracts
Use frameworks like OpenZeppelin or platforms like Aragon,
DAOstack, or Snapshot to create and deploy smart
contracts.
4. Distribute Governance Tokens
Decide how tokens will be distributed:
Initial offering (e.g., ICO, airdrop).
Performance-based rewards.
5. Engage Your Community
Build and grow a community of contributors.
Use platforms like Discord and X for communication.
6. Launch and Govern
Open the DAO for proposals and voting.
Allow the community to participate in decision-making and
resource allocation.
Smart contracts can have vulnerabilities. Conduct audits
regularly.

Exploring Offshore Jurisdictions: Things to think
about (Sara Hall - Walkers) Page 42 - 
Many businesses use offshore vehicles as part of their overall
structure, such as Kraken, Coinbase and Bitfinex, and many
community led projects have successfully developed a
thriving ecosystem using one or more offshore vehicles.
Maker DAO, Aave, Arbitrum and Worldcoin are well known
global examples but there are hundreds more.
The principal reason to consider choosing offshore is
because many activities which would be regulated in an
onshore jurisdiction — such as token issuance or the
operation of a fully decentralised DEX - are either outside the
scope of regulation or lightly regulated in several of the
offshore jurisdictions. In addition, several of the offshore
jurisdictions have a government policy of actively supporting
digital asset businesses and are able to shape their laws
relatively quickly as technology develops. There are also
skilled service providers who are passionate about Web3
such as directors, lawyers, accountants, and governance
experts who can support the smooth running of the
ecosystem. And there are specific kinds of companies which
lend themselves to Web3 businesses governed by DAOs —
such as the Cayman foundation or the British Virgin Islands
(BVI) company limited by guarantee.
Before following the well-trodden path of setting up a
Cayman foundation, with a BVI token issuer, however, it's
important to consider some "up front" factors and to take tax
and regulatory advice as a first step. One of the first things to
consider is where the people who are making strategic
decisions will be based. This is because onshore activity such
as onshore board meetings may inadvertently cause the
operations to be "on-shored" — thus defeating the purpose
of setting up offshore. It's also important to consider budget
and which particular jurisdiction might work best from a cost/
benefit perspective.
A Cayman foundation is often seen as the most prestigious of
the foundation companies offshore. Setting up and running a
Cayman foundation therefore comes at a cost which many
new start-ups and scale-ups are not immediately able to
meet. A jurisdiction such as the BVI which has lower costs
might be a good alternative.
Founders should be aware that a handful of activities if
conducted by an offshore entity for profit may require the
entity to have adequate "economic substance" in the specific
jurisdiction where the profits are generated (though the
alternative is to make the entity tax resident onshore). Before
executing on a proposal, it is therefore important to take legal
advice on all aspects of the project, including the proposed
income generating elements, to ensure there are no
showstoppers or additional unexpected costs.
It's also important to consider if and how the founders (and
investors) are going to earn revenues from the overall project.
Many offshore ecosystems will be the brainchild of one or
more talented developers who have set up their own
company. It is this company that often sells services to the
offshore ecosystem, and profits can be earned by founders
and investors in the form of dividends. Finally, the offshore
ecosystem will always be accessed by people onshore — and
so every project will need to budget for assessing whether its
interactions with onshore users are going to be restricted by
onshore regulation (and if so, how to achieve compliance).


DAO Legal and Tax Standards (Joni Pirovich - Regulatory
Interoperability Lead, DAOstar (a project of The
Metagovernance Project, Inc) - Page 43

As worldwide regulations about DAOs evolve, and without
standardisation of key information about DAOs and our
interactions with DAOs or blockchains, the industry cannot
easily interoperate with traditional means of legal and tax
reporting.
DAOstar is the standards body for DAOs, with over 80 of the
world's largest DAOs and DAO tooling providers, and was
convened with the spirit of maturation through data
standardisation.
DAOstar's standards, DAOlPs - or DAO Improvement
Proposals - are available here: https://github.com/metagov/
daostar/tree/main/DAOIPs
A DAOIP is a design document providing information to the
DAO ecosystem, or describing a new feature for DAOs or
their processes or environment. Each DAOIP author is
responsible for building consensus within the community and
documenting dissenting opinions.
DAOs should firstly have regard to DAOIP-2 which describes
the key data fields about a DAO that should be displayed by a
DAO: https://github.com/metagov/daostar/blob/main/DAOIPs/
daoip-2.md. Compliance with DAOIP-2 would be similar to
sharing basic information with the registrar of limited liability
companies in a jurisdiction, so that the entity information can
be easily searched by the public.
DAOIP-8 sets out the recommended security data fields that
a DAO should present to the public, and can be found here:
https://github.com/metagov/daostar/blob/main/DAOIPs/
daoip-8.md.
DAOIP-9 focusses on a DAO's legal communications. The
goal of DAOIP-9 is to define a clear and easy method for
communicating legal information to and from online
communities—whether a DAO or other form of entity-that
may or may not be recognised as legal or tax persons but
that do have an onchain presence. DAOIP-9: Legal
Communications: https://github.com/metagov/daostar/blob/
main/DAOlPs/daoip-9.md
Finally, DAOIP-10 is about the presentation of tax information
by DAOs, and is modelled from the OECD's Crypto-Asset
Reporting Framework with modifications for the
idiosyncrasies of DAOs. DAOIP-10 is awaiting publication, at
the time of writing this report.


TOKEN TYPOLOGIES Page - 45

Page 46 - 
Web3S Games
(Omri Bouton - Outlier Ventures)
The convergence of video games and blockchain technology
has now been hailed for some time as one of the most
promising areas of Web3 convergence - one that has the
potential to bring more people into Web3 and help the
industry achieve the growth and scale it has been striving for.
In this guide, the term Web3 games covers a broad range of
implementations, such as: i) fully onchain games, where the
game logic runs entirely on the blockchain; and ii) games that
integrate cryptoassets to a lesser degree (for example, NFTs
for in-game assets).
Web3 games bring unique regulatory challenges that are
often overlooked. Many developers focus on compliance with
financial services and anti-money laundering (AML) laws -
and rightly so - but there is more to consider.
For example, if you plan to issue tokens or NFTs before
launching the game to raise funds, and/or if your game
allows for the in-game trading of cryptoassets (including
NFTs), then your game will likely fall under the scope of anti-
money laundering regulation (for more, please see “Setting
up for Success — Risk Mitigation” and “Token Launch”
elsewhere in this guide).
Conversely, if users can buy “qualifying cryptoassets” through
your game, then that would likely be deemed as an invitation
or inducement to engage in investment activity under the
Financial Promotions regime (for more, please see the section
on financial promotions elsewhere in this guide).
In addition to the considerations outlined above, one unique
regulatory challenge arising from the convergence of
blockchain and gaming is gambling regulation - which forms
the focus of this chapter, as other regulatory topics are
already addressed in separate sections.
Before we delve further into the different types of gambling
activities, it is important to highlight two key aspects of
gambling regulation: its extra-territorial scope and the lack of
harmonisation across jurisdictions.
Firstly, UK gambling regulation applies extra-territorially. This
means that even if your business is not based in the UK,
offering a game that falls within the scope of the UK
Gambling Act to UK players will subject you to its
requirements. Secondly, holding a gambling licence from a
jurisdiction outside the UK does not grant you the right to
offer gambling activities to UK players. Each jurisdiction
operates independently, and a licence issued elsewhere is
not recognised as valid for activities within the UK.
Intro to Gambling Regulation
In the UK, offering ‘gambling facilities’ without a licence from
the Gambling Commission (the competent authority) is
illegal. Breaching this law can lead to fines, imprisonment, or
both.
Under the UK Gambling Act 2005 (“Gambling Act”),
gambling is defined as:
« Gaming;
¢ Betting; and
¢ Lotteries.
However, securing a gambling licence is difficult, expensive,
and often doesn’t align with the goal of Web3 game
developers. Therefore, it’s critical to know whether your
game might be considered gambling so you can adjust its
design to avoid this classification.
With that in mind, let’s look at the main gambling activities.
Gaming
Gaming is likely the most relevant gambling activity for Web3
games. Therefore, we have spent some more time breaking
down the definition so as to try and provide as much
guidance as possible.
Gaming is defined as “playing a game of chance for a prize”
- here is what this means:

Page 47 - 
Playing
The Gambling Act explains that a person is considered to be
"playing' a game of chance simply by participating in the
game, regardless of whether they are playing alone or with
others.
Importantly, the law doesn't require players to pay or risk
something of value to bring the game under gambling laws.
A free game with a prize can still qualify.
Game of chance
A "game of chance" is broadly defined, and includes games
that combine elements of both chance and skill, games
where chance can theoretically be eliminated through
exceptional skill, and even games that are simply presented
as involving an element of chance.
In my experience, this is one area founders may accidentally
get wrong, because the definition of "game of chance" is
intentionally broad, and not limited to games that are wholly
oased on chance.
For example, if your game includes randomised item drops
(like in Mario Kart) or unpredictable challenges, it's likely a
game of chance. On the other hand, if the game is purely
skill-based, where the better player always wins, it's more
likely to fall outside the meaning of "game of chance" and be
deemed as a "game of skills".
In essence, if a skilled player doesn't always achieve better
results than an unskilled one, your game likely involves
chance.
Prize
A "prize" under the Gambling Act is defined as "money or
money's worth" - essentially, something capable of having
monetary value.
In traditional video games, in-game items are typically
confined within the game environment and cannot be freely
traded or sold. This is further reinforced by End User Licence
Agreements (EULAs), the contracts between game providers
and players, which often prohibit users from selling their
accounts or monetising in-game assets. Therefore, in
traditional video games, in-game items and currencies are
unlikely to qualify as something capable of having monetary
value (or a "prize"), because players are generally unable to
extract these 'assets' from the game and trade them for
money.
The Gambling Commission confirmed this view in relation to
loot boxes, stating that:
"Where in-game items obtained via loot boxes are confined
for use within the game and cannot be cashed out, it is
unlikely to be caught as a licensable gambling activity."
However, Web3 games often integrate cryptoassets-such as
fungible tokens used as in-game currencies, non-fungible
tokens (NFTs) representing in-game assets, or other
blockchain-based items-which are inherently transferable.
While developers could theoretically design non-transferable
cryptoassets (for example, 'soulbound' tokens), this would go
against one of the main premises of Web3 games: the ability
for players to truly own their in-game assets and use or trade
them freely outside the game environment.
Unlike traditional in-game assets, Web3 assets built on
blockchain infrastructure are inherently more likely to be
classified as a "prize" under the Act. As a result, if a Web3
game includes elements of chance, it is likely to fall within the
scope of the Gambling Act.
Therefore, if your game incorporates cryptoassets, ensure
that the mechanics for awarding prizes are entirely skill-
based and devoid of any elements of chance.
Betting
Betting is defined as placing or accepting a wager on the
outcome of an uncertain event, the likelihood of something
occurring or not, or whether a specific statement is true. In
essence, any situation where a player risks something of
value on an uncertain outcome is likely to qualify as betting.
In the context of Web3 games, cryptoassets-—due to their
inherent value—can be considered a wager under this
definition.
This concept extends beyond traditional betting and is
especially relevant to Web3 fantasy sports games. These
games often involve prediction-based mechanics, such as
forecasting which teams or players will perform best in real-
world competitions, with point systems or rewards tied to
these predictions.
If you are developing a Web3 fantasy game, such as a
fantasy football platform, it is crucial to evaluate whether the
game could fall under the definition of betting, and you will
likely need to adjust the game's design to avoid regulatory
pitfalls (for more, please see the Prize Competitions section
below).

Page 48 - 
Lotteries
Lotteries are defined as arrangements where participants pay
to enter, and prizes are awarded entirely by chance. A key
feature of lotteries is the combination of a payment-to-enter
mechanism and randomised prize distribution.
In the context of Web3 games, requiring players to hold a
specific NFT to participate is likely to be regarded as a form
of payment, given that NFTs are typically purchased.
Furthermore, as with gaming, cryptoassets-such as tokens
or NFTs— are likely to qualify as prizes due to their inherent
monetary value.
Some mechanics and features that could be classified as
lotteries include:
• Lootboxes: Where cryptoassets (e.g., tokens or NFTs) are
awarded randomly through the opening of lootboxes.
• Randomised Prizes: Mechanics where players pay (e.g.,
in cryptocurrency) to spin a wheel for prizes, or where
prizes are distributed based on chance within gameplay,
such as randomised drops from defeating enemies or
items scattered randomly on a game map.
• Token Staking with Randomised Rewards: Where
players stake tokens and receive rewards distributed on a
randomised basis.
Therefore, if you plan to include any of these mechanics, or
any feature where prizes are allocated by chance and
participation involves payment, it is essential to recognise that
it will likely qualify as a lottery. Offering such features without
proper authorisation could result in a breach of the Gambling
Act. Therefore, you will need to make adjustments to the
design of the 'game' and to how you offer it to avoid that
(please see the Free Draws section below).
Free Draws
A free draw is a type of promotional activity where participants
are not required to pay to enter.
There are two types of free draws:
• Entirely Free Entry: where all entries must be free of
charge (keeping in mind that requiring holding an NFT to
participate will likely not quality as a free entry').
• Paid and Free Entry Routes: where there is both a paid
and a free entry option. However, if you include a paid
entry route, you must ensure that:
• Participants can choose to enter without paying.
• The free entry route is no more expensive and no less
convenient than the paid route (effectively, you cannot
provide preferential or faster entry methods for paid
participants while requiring free entrants to go through
a more time-consuming or complicated process).
• The free entry route is prominently displayed and
promoted at the same level as the paid route.
• The choice between free and paid routes is clearly
communicated to participants.
• The system used to allocate prizes treats entries from
both routes equally, without favouring one over the
other.
Prize Competitions
A prize competition is an activity where the outcome
depends entirely on participants' skill, judgement, or
knowledge.
To qualify as a prize competition, the skill, judgement, or
knowledge required must:
• be sufficiently challenging to deter a significant number of
people from entering; and
• prevent a proportion of participants from winning a prize.
Simple multiple-choice questions or questions that allow a
second attempt rarely meet this standard, as they are not
deemed challenging enough. 22
Out of Scope: Free Draws & Prize
Competitions
Unlike the activities discussed earlier, Free Draws and Prize
Competitions fall outside the scope of the Gambling Act and
can therefore be offered without the need for a licence.
However, it is crucial to ensure that your offering aligns with
the legal definitions of Free Draws or Prize Competitions
(which are purposefully narrow) to avoid unintentionally
falling under the Gambling Act.
22 Free Draws and Prize Competitions, Gambling Commission (23 October 2024) 

Page 49 - 
Design With Regulation in Mind
The last thing you want is to invest significant resources—
time, money, and effort-into developing a project, only to
later discover that it cannot be legally offered. To avoid this,
it's essential to consider gambling regulations early in the
development process and design your game to steer clear of
activities that may fall within the definition of gambling.
Prioritising skill-based mechanics, where applicable, can be
an effective way to achieve this.
Carefully evaluate your project to identify any design
elements that could bring it under the scope of gambling
regulation.
To get started, ask yourself the following key questions:
Does entry to the game require payment?
(Remember that requiring players to hold an NFT could be
regarded as a form of payment.)
Are rewards distributed based on chance?
(Randomised rewards or prize allocations are highly likely to
fall under gambling regulations.)
What determines the outcome of the game loop?
(Is the outcome entirely skill-based, or does it involve an
element of chance? For example, if the game loop is
repeated multiple times, would the outcome vary due to
chance?)
Please keep in mind that this is only a starting point to help
you identify game elements that might increase the likelihood
of your project falling within the scope of gambling
regulations.
Ultimately, consulting a lawyer who specialises in this area is
the most reliable course of action. While this might feel
burdensome—especially when you're juggling multiple
challenges in your project—it is a critical investment,
particularly in today's regulatory climate.
For instance, Sorare, one of the most prominent Web3
games, is currently facing legal action from the Gambling
Commission. This highlights the increasing scrutiny on Web3
games and underscores the importance for businesses
operating in the UK, or offering games to UK users, to either
ensure they fall outside the scope of the Gambling Act or
fully comply with its requirements.
of
A Practical Tip
Resist the temptation to rely on financial incentives to drive
engagement. Based on my experience, projects that focus
heavily on financial rewards tend to attract speculators and
traders rather than genuine players. These communities often
abandon the project when the tokenomics falter, leaving the
ecosystem unsustainable.
Instead, prioritise creating a game that offers a genuinely
enjoyable and engaging experience. Players who are drawn
in by great gameplay are far more likely to stay loyal. If your
game includes cryptoassets (tokens, NFTs, or otherwise), limit
their distribution to skill-based mechanics to align with this
approach. By focusing on fun and skill-based design, you
can build a sustainable and dedicated player community -
and as always, please consult a lawyer!

Page 50 - 
SocialFi: Boosting Organic User Growth with SocialFi
(lan Cox-CEO and Founder, Avark Agency / Manchester
Blockchain Alliance)
SocialFi has become the latest buzzword in Webs, with many
brands and products incorporating it into their strategies. At
its core, SocialFi focuses on creating engaging, reward-
driven experiences that overcome the design limitations of
traditional Web2 apps and social media platforms. By
integrating SocialFi, communities are incentivised to interact
with an app or platform, produce content about the product
and community experiences, and boost the ecosystem's
reach through organic word-of-mouth.
No Project in Web3 will succeed without a Solid User
Base
Community building lies at the heart of success, serving as a
dependable way to expand the user base and enhance user
acquisition. By launching gamified SocialFi campaigns that
motivate users to engage and share publicly, brands can lay
the groundwork for future success. This strategy generates
buzz and momentum while establishing a sustainable
foundation to support the ecosystem and fuel ongoing
product development.
Great SocialFi campaigns don't happen by chance. Success
requires a careful balance of strategy, visual design, and
storytelling. A well-defined strategy ensures campaigns
resonate with the target audience, while exceptional design
makes the experience intuitive and visually engaging.
Meanwhile, strong storytelling gives campaigns emotional
depth, making them relatable and inspiring users to connect
with the brand on a deeper level. Together, these elements
help create a campaign that captivates users and fosters
loyalty.
Turn User Interaction into Valuable Insights...
The platform's flow is typically designed to be simple, making
it easy for users to get involved. However, the challenge lies
in maintaining engagement. Delivering a sense of
accomplishment and creating a feedback loop that motivates
users to return and share the platform is critical. Ultimately,
the goal is to build a legion of super users-individuals who
are rewarded for their time and energy and who, in turn,
share ownership of the brand. This is the future of Web3
business: building ownership through community.
Campaigns can progress in "seasons," with each season
lasting roughly six weeks. At the end of each season, new
features are introduced to sustain engagement and growth.
The abundance of metrics available allows for continuous
testing, evaluation, and improvement. Developing "super
users" is especially valuable. These are the users who rank
highest on leaderboards and progress charts, and they can
be engaged as testers and ambassadors for your product.
They naturally roll into the main platform, becoming an
extension of your community and team.
A Loyal Fanbase is your Key to Web3 Success
Gamified platforms highlight the importance of creating
experiences that users can actively engage with. The power
of a dedicated fanbase should never be underestimated,
particularly when launching a product or token. These loyal
users can—and should—be rewarded for their efforts in
building brand awareness.
Steps projects can take to ensure a successful SocialFi
strategy with regard to both legal and best practice factors
include:
• ensure you have clear guidelines for community members
around good behaviour and expectations. Take time to
ensure you block bots from taking part and keep
channels clear for genuine users only. The community
moderation team will be vital when ensuring proper
engagement in any open discussion channels;
• consider adapting your brand to be more open and allow
users to use certain brand assets in permitted ways to
create shared videos, assets and images. You will need to
consider your intellectual property licences and think
about what parts of your brand you would like to protect
and what could be opened up to community usage. You
could create a brand pack and acceptable use guidelines,
TOO;
• if you are giving key governance roles to community
members, ensure they have the right skills to take on any
responsibilities;
• when collaborating with other brands, use a collaboration
agreement to ensure you have clear legal arrangements,
including in respect of IP rights;
• be conscious of marketing and advertising laws, including
local restrictions on the advertising of crypto-tokens, and
take advice on compliance early on in your project.

Page 51 - 
DePIN (Morgan Lewis - Brabners LLP)
Web3 advocates often state that we should all be concerned
about how there is an oligopoly over the second generation
of the internet and that Web3 presents an opportunity for the
power and control to be wrestled from the few and given to
the many.
The development of cloud infrastructure has revolutionised
the way governments, businesses and individuals access and
use technology. The use of an internal server room and a
personal home computer (with its accompanying pc tower
under the desk) are now no longer used by the masses and
have to a degree become a mark of a tech laggard. However,
the supply of the underlying cloud infrastructure can certainly
be understood to be an oligopoly due to being dominated by
Amazon Web Services (AWS), Microsoft Azure, and Google
Cloud.
It is a natural consequence of working in a disruptive manner
with new or innovative technology that the legal and
regulatory backdrop is often not very clear, meaning that any
such business needs to be prepared to adapt and change as
the legal and regulatory landscape develops. Unfortunately
for any such business it means that lawyers like myself often
respond with "it depends", "we will have to wait and see" or "|
don't know" when answering their enquiries. In order to
navigate this uncertainty it is wise to focus on "what" is
actually happening in the supply of a product or service
rather than get too bogged down in the "how" it is
happening. Doing so will allow you to draw from:
• existing laws and regulations for guidance as to how the
legal and regulatory landscape is likely to develop; and
Rightly so, advocates for and providers of decentralised
alternatives are quick to point out that such an oligopoly is
• any contractual arrangements that are somewhat similar
in nature as inspiration for how to structure any new or
novel type of contractual arrangement.
cause for grave concern. This is because its failure would be
catastrophic given the pervasive nature of cloud infrastructure The contractual framework for the operation of a DePIN
and the fundamental impact it has on nearly all aspects of our differs from that of traditional cloud infrastructure
day to day life. Surely something so critical to the smooth
predominantly as a result of the fact that the infrastructure is
working of the modern world should not rest upon a
not owned and the services are not being directly provided
foundation of a small handful of powerful companies. At best
by the operator of the DePIN.
this small group could hold the world to ransom on price and
at worst a sudden full or partial failure of the operations of
one of these providers would see entire industries grind to a
halt.
DePINs seek to replace the rows and rows of servers located
in data centres with the nodes of a decentralised, blockchain
or encryption-based system, with the nodes typically being
rewarded for the use of their computational power by the
network.
Firstly operators of a DePIN will need to ensure that the
contracts they enter into with their customers (for access to
and use of the DePIN) are put together with the
understanding that the DePIN's infrastructure is not owned by
the operator of the DePIN. Specific points to note here are
that the operator of the DePIN should refrain from giving any
warranty that it owns the DePIN or the infrastructure and
should ensure that it is permitted to utilise the services of
subcontractors (and be permitted to amend these
subcontractors without any requirement to notify or receive
the approval of the customer).
At this point it is worth outlining a general disclaimer that I
provide to any business seeking to disrupt an industry by
using new or innovative technology.
Further, customers are likely to have concerns about the
scalability, reliability and security of a DePIN when compared
with traditional cloud infrastructure. Any operator of a DePIN
therefore needs to ensure that a correct balance is struck
within any contract that assuages the customer's concerns
but does not over-promise the DePIN's capabilities.

Page 52 - 
The operator of a DePIN will be unable to provide the same
levels of guarantees as a household name cloud services
provider in these respects and therefore it is likely that the
customer's worries will need to be relieved via educating the
customer on the "security by design" nature of DePIN and the
operators plans for scalability and reliability (instead of by the
customer imposing onerous contractual damages on the
operator).
• guarantees surrounding availability of access to the node's
computational power;
• detailed information security requirements; and
Additionally, one thing that should not be missed in any sales
pitch is the fact that a balanced contract can in fact be
entered into with the operator of the DePIN, and not one pre-
determined to favour the cloud services provider (as is the
way with AWS, Microsoft Azure and Google Cloud standard
terms).
• additional protections to ensure the sharing of any
personal data is done so in manner that is compliant with
GDPR/UK GDPR (and if needed the inclusion of an
international data transfer agreement or the standard
contractual clauses as approved by the EU, where the
node is located outside the UK or EEA). This is still true
even if the data shared with the node is encrypted
irrespective of whether the node has the capability to
decrypt the data or not).
Secondly the operator of a DePIN should enter into
subcontractor type agreements with the owners of the nodes
on the DePIN in order to utilise each node for the purpose of
the provision of services by the operator. Given the number
of nodes within a DePIN this should be facilitated by requiring
the owner of each node to agree to a standard set of terms
when downloading/installing the operator's software that will
give the operator access to the computational power of the
node.
Finally, given that the contracts with the owners of the
DePIN's nodes will need to be entered into prior to the
operator of the DePIN agreeing a contract with a customer
(as it should take place as part of the set-up of the DePIN),
the operator needs to retain the ability to amend its contract
with the owner of each node without obtaining their approval.
This will allow changes to be made based on the obligations
that any operator commits to via its contract with any future
customer. This could be done by the contract including an
From my experience, the operators of a DePIN have been
express right for the operator to amend the contract at will
proactive in putting contracts together with node owners (i) to (although this may be unenforceable in some circumstances
outline how access and use of the node's computational
and jurisdictions) or by updating the contract/terms and
power will work in practice and ii) to set out the mechanism
requiring the owner of each node to re-accept the new
for how the reward (i.e. the consideration element of the
contract terms when they next login or access the software
contract) is earned.
dashboard (that is typically used to manage the node's role
within the DePIN).
However, what is often overlooked ja indudinan
uffiainst
protection for the operator of the D
Quick Look Attachments
that access and use of each node's
critical to the operator being able to provide a service to its
customers. This means that the contract should include
guarantees/warranties that would typically be given by a
cloud service provider to their customer via their standard
terms, but in this instance be given by the owner of any node
for the benefit of the operator of the DePIN.
Further thought should also be given to whether this contract
should include additional obligations on the owner of any
node to reflect the obligations placed upon the operator of
the DePIN to assuage the scalability, reliability and security
concerns of the operator's customers (as outlined above).
These might include:
Photo Credit: Cayetano Gros (www.lummi.ai)

Page 53 - 
Practical Guide for DeFi Developers
(Maria Riivari - Avara)
Decentralised Finance (DeFi) has rapidly grown into a diverse
and complex ecosystem, presenting unique challenges and
opportunities. This chapter explores DeFi in three key parts:
first, it examines jurisdictional considerations and the current
regulatory landscape in the UK. Second, it provides
practical guidance for protocol developers, focusing on
legal considerations for creating and operating
permissionless smart contract protocols. Finally, it offers a
simple toolkit for front-end developers, addressing critical
factors for navigating running interfaces within the DeFi
space based on current industry practices.
Part 1. UK Regulation & Perspectives on DeFi
One of the challenges with modern internet and blockchain
systems from a legal perspective is their inherently global
nature. In contrast, laws are jurisdiction-specific and do not
operate seamlessly across borders. As a rule, it is not
straightforward to identify whether a particular DeFi project
falls under one or another jurisdiction due to its decentralised
and cross-border nature; despite extensive global discussions
and consultations, currently there remains little clarity on
whether, and to what extent, phenomena categorised as
"DeFi" are subject to regulation.
Currently in the UK DeFi operates largely in an unregulated
space, with the UK legal framework for DeFi still evolving as
regulators strive to balance fostering innovation with ensuring
consumer protection and financial stability. Key legislation
relevant to this area, discussed elsewhere in this guide,
includes the Financial Services and Markets Act 2023, which
introduces provisions for regulating cryptoassets, including
stablecoins, under existing financial rules.23 The FCA plays a
critical role in overseeing crypto promotions and enforcing
compliance with anti-money laundering (AML) regulations,
signalling a growing regulatory focus on DeFi platforms.
However, unique challenges such as decentralised
governance, pseudonymity, and the lack of traditional
intermediaries create uncertainties about the application of
current UK laws.
Future guidance is expected to address these gaps,
particularly as DeFi projects are likely to increase
engagement with traditional financial markets. This evolving
regulatory environment highlights the need for clarity and
adaptability to manage the complexities inherent in
decentralised financial systems.
That said, it should not be forgotten that certain activities
(which are unlikely anyway to fall under what would be
understood as "DeFi") which fall under the regulatory
framework in the UK include:
• Custody of Assets: Providing custody services for digital
assets, such as managing digital wallets or safeguarding
private keys, is subject to regulatory scrutiny. The FCA
oversees firms offering these services to ensure the
protection of customer funds and compliance with anti-
money laundering (AML) regulations.
• Facilitation of Fiat-to-Crypto or Crypto-to-Fiat
Transactions: Activities involving the exchange between
fiat currencies and cryptocurrencies are regulated under
the UK's AML and counter-terrorism financing (CTF) laws.
Firms facilitating these transactions must register with the
FCA and implement robust AML/CTF controls. The FCA
has taken enforcement actions against firms failing to
comply with these regulations, highlighting the
importance of adherence to AML requirements.
• Stablecoin Issuance: Whilst not fully regulated in the UK
today, the UK government has recently announced plans
to regulate stablecoins under a unified regulatory
framework, ensuring they maintain stable value and are
appropriately backed by assets. Tailored rules will address
their issuance and use, aligning with global standards like
the European Union's Markets in Crypto-Assets (MiCA)24
Regulation. The framework, set for early 2025, aims to
balance innovation with consumer protection and
financial stability while positioning the UK as a
competitive hub for digital assets. 25
23Financial Services and Markets Act 2023
2* Regulation (EU) 2023/1114 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 May 2023 on Markets in Crypto-assets, 2023 O.J. (L 150) 1
25Keynote Address at the Tokenisation Summit: UK Government Approach to Tokenisation and Regulation, UK Government (25 November 2024)

Page 54 - 
This brings us to an important development in the European
regulatory landscape. Whilst of course not applicable in the
UK, MiCA, which has been announced to serve as the
inspiration for the future UK regulations, addresses DeFi in
Recital 22. This recital clarifies the regulation's applicability to
decentralised services:
"This Regulation should apply to natural and legal persons and
certain other undertakings and to the crypto-asset services
and activities performed, provided or controlled, directly or
indirectly, by them, including when part of such activities or
services is performed in a decentralised manner. However,
where crypto-asset services are provided in a fully
decentralised manner without any intermediary, they should
not fall within the scope of this Regulation."
This section can be interpreted to mean that MiCA covers
services involving intermediaries, even if some operations are
decentralised. In contrast, services that are entirely
decentralised, operating without any intermediaries, are
excluded from MiCA's scope.
This distinction is important for understanding how DeFi
platforms may be regulated under MiCA. Unfortunately trying
to define "decentralisation" is like trying to herd cats — good
luck getting everyone on the same page. One attempt to
shine light on the scope of this carve out came from the
Danish Financial Supervisory Authority (DFSA) who
emphasised that significant criteria must be met for an
offering to be considered truly decentralised. Therefore, this
carve-out, while promising, leaves room for interpretation
and highlights the importance of understanding the nuanced
distinctions between decentralised and centralised operations
when navigating the regulatory environment. If there's one
thing to take away from this carve-out, it's that
decentralisation can really impact a project's regulatory
status, especially if it's fully achieved.
Additionally, it should be noted that HM Revenue & Customs
(HMRC) has been particularly active in addressing the tax
implications of DeFi activities, such as lending and staking of
cryptoassets. Recognising the complexities and ambiguities
within existing tax frameworks, HMRC initiated a call for
evidence in July 2022 to gather insights from stakeholders
on the taxation of DeFi transactions. Building upon the
feedback received, HMRC launched a formal consultation in
April 2023, proposing legislative changes to better align the
tax treatment of DeFi activities with their economic
substance.26
Part 2. A Compass for DeFi Protocol Developers
Rather than dwelling too much on the rapidly changing
status quo of DeFi regulatory developments in the UK, the
following two sections seek to focus on providing practical
ideas for developers to navigate this evolving landscape.
Specifically, we discuss permissionless protocol networks. In
this context, "permissionless" refers to the ability of anyone to
interact with a protocol's smart contracts, either through a
user interface or directly on the blockchain.
It is important to note that legal risks are highly situation, fact,
and context-specific, making individual assessments crucial.
From a legal perspective, developers typically have no direct
connection or contractual relationship with the end users of
the DeFi protocols; they operate in a mere conduit role, solely
providing the framework for these decentralised interactions.
While we explore topics related to user interfaces in Part 3 of
this Chapter, it is important to consider the distinction
between protocol development and interface development.
Some organisations engage in both, making all
considerations relevant to their operations. However,
maintaining conceptual clarity about these activities is crucial
for understanding the developer's position and
responsibilities as they can help delineate legal and
operational boundaries. What follows seeks to offer "food for
thought" on what might make a difference in terms of various
legal risks in designing DeFi protocols.
1. Prioritise Security
The protocol's security is your best security. Building on new
technologies is inherently challenging, especially in self-
custodial systems where the stakes are high.
While many factors may be beyond developers' control,
prioritising security is crucial —not only to ensure system
integrity but also to protect users. Beyond the ethical
imperative, the practical reality is that security lapses can
increase the risks for developer organisations, including legal
ones. Even if developers are not fundamentally liable,
managing these risks can be time-consuming and stressful.
Investing in security is not just about doing the right thing; it
is also a sound long-term strategy, aligning with the broader
goal of building a fair and secure decentralised financial
system.
26The Taxation of Decentralised Finance Involving the Lending and Staking of Cryptoassets: Call for Evidence, UK Government (27 April 2023)

Page 55 - 
Trade-offs are often unavoidable, particularly in the early
stages of development. It should be recognised that creating
robust systems requires balancing numerous complex factors
and navigating difficult choices between competing risks.
Just as Rome wasn't built in a day, industry practices evolve
as systems mature, providing more reliable security standards
over time. Security is a key reason decentralisation often
exists on a spectrum, particularly in early stages. Initial
considerations may involve compromises, such as
incorporating upgradeability features or temporarily retaining
admin keys. These measures can sometimes be justified to
ensure the system's security is reasonably validated and
provide additional safeguards to protect end users from
potential losses. While there is no one-size-fits-all approach
to managing these challenges, demonstrating that decisions
were made with security as a guiding principle can
significantly benefit developers in the long run.
2. Champion Documentation
Transparency is fundamental to building trust in DeFi, which
inherently benefits from its ability to eliminate information
asymmetries through open and accessible systems.
Developers can embrace this principle by providing clear and
comprehensive documentation that explains their protocols,
highlights potential risks, and makes relevant data readily
available.
DeFi comes with various risks, including vulnerabilities in
smart contracts, unique interoperability challenges related to
bridges and oracles, and broader economic risks like market
volatility. By proactively disclosing these risks as they pertain
to their specific project, developers not only empower users
to make informed decisions but also reduce the likelihood of
disputes or issues that could undermine the project's
reputation.
High-quality, credible, and accessible documentation
benefits both users and the ecosystem. For users, it fosters
informed decision-making and builds trust. For the broader
DeFi community, it encourages collaboration, innovation, and
development by other contributors, ultimately strengthening
decentralisation and expanding the ecosystem.
3. Address the Degree of Control
DeFi is built on the principle of decentralisation, but this
concept encompasses varying degrees and interpretations. In
addition to what has been discussed above about
decentralisation itself, developers might consider the
following points when designing protocols:
• Mutability vs. Immutability: Striking the right balance
between flexibility and security is often a key
consideration in deciding whether a smart contract could
be made immutable. Immutability is often regarded as
beneficial because it can be seen to introduce a degree
of separation between the actions of the developer
deploying the DeFi protocol and the permissionless
activity that may occur afterward by other users. The idea
is that this separation might help reduce the likelihood of
developers being perceived as owners or controllers of a
system, potentially mitigating liabilities.
• Resilience Through Decentralisation: It has been
argued that one goal of decentralised systems seeks to
minimise single points of failure. By reducing reliance on
specific individuals or entities, protocols can aim to
function more effectively and distribute risks across the
network. A resilient system may be more aligned with
decentralisation principles, enhancing robustness and
trust in the network.
Part 3. DeFi Interface Developer Cheat Sheet
Permissionless access to DeFi allows users to engage with
networks and protocols in various ways, and the interfaces
themselves vary widely—some focus on specific
functionalities, while others cater to broader DeFi needs,
creating a range of user experiences.
The regulatory uncertainties surrounding DeFi also extend to
interfaces. A distinction is, however, is that interface providers
often have a closer connection to end users, unlike the
decentralised blockchain networks they interact with or the
developers that wrote the code of the network. However, this
connection does not necessarily impose liability on
developers for user interactions or the underlying smart
contracts. Nonetheless, it is a critical consideration that could
play a significant role in mitigating legal risks.
There is no one-size-fits-all solution for DeFi interfaces, but
the following toolkit outlines areas that developers may
consider. It reflects practices observed across various DeFi
front-ends and highlights aspects that may be relevant
depending on specific circumstances. While many points are
rooted in general principles for online platforms, they can be
adapted to address the nuances of DeFi.

Page 56 - 
Aspect
Security
Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
Clickwrap Agreements
Decentralised Hosting
Geoblocking
VPN Blocking
User-Friendly Design
User Support
Warnings & Notifications
Fiat On/Off-Ramps
Promotions
Third-Party Materials
Considerations
Security is a critical concern for DeFi interfaces, which are common attack vectors.
Many interfaces focus on implementing robust measures to protect users and systems.
Some interfaces adopt detailed terms to outline user responsibilities, limit liability, and
address specific risks.
Important to provide a clear privacy policy that complies with data protection laws and
explains data collection and usage.
Some interfaces use clickwrap agreements requiring users to actively accept terms and
the privacy policy, improving the argument that users understood and agreed to key
terms.
Hosting on decentralised platforms (e.g., IPFS) is an approach some developers take to
align with DeFi's principles and enhance resilience.
An option considered by some front-ends is geoblocking to restrict access from
jurisdictions with regulatory or legal concerns.
Some interfaces include tools for monitoring blockchain transactions or flagging/
blocking certain wallets based on risk factors from connecting to the interface.
Interfaces often emphasise user-friendly designs to reduce mistakes and enhance user
experience. A well-informed user is less likely to encounter issues. Moreover, in the
event of a dispute, developers are more likely to successfully rely on the argument that
users were empowered to make informed decisions based on the comprehensive
information provided and accepted by the user.
While many DeFi projects rely on community-managed resources (e.g., Discord), some
interfaces consider offering dedicated support channels to address user needs.
Some interfaces include warnings or notifications to alert users about potential risks,
such as transaction fees, failed connections, or security concerns.
Interfaces that facilitate fiat on/off-ramps may highlight that the end user typically
engages directly with the exchange provider, which may be regulated. Developers
should consider clarifying these relationships and undertaking due diligence on the
requirements on these providers.
Where promotions are involved, developers may assess regulations governing
promotional activities, particularly in jurisdictions with strict advertising rules
Developers may want to address how third-party content or integrations (e.g., incentive
programs, fiat gateways, analytics tools) are presented, with disclaimers that clarify the
interface provider's role and limit liability for third-party issues.
This list aims to guide DeFi interface developers by offering an overview of many industry practices and key considerations. Each project is
unique, with varying jurisdictional connections, and developers should carefully assess the relevance of these points in the context of their
specific circumstances and the evolving regulatory landscape. It is also important to continue innovating and developing new best practices,
as there is still much to explore and improve in this rapidly evolving space.
Disclaimer: This guide provides general information and without limitation is not legal, tax, strategic or financial advice. Please do your own further research. For
advice specific to your situation, consult a qualified professional.


SETTING UP FOR SUCCESS
~ AND RISK MITIGATION
(Leon Hurd - Cybersandbox and Keystone Law Limited) Page - 57 

Page 58 
Overview of Anti-Money Laundering
(AML), Sanctions and Compliance Law
The fragmented nature of regulatory regimes in the UK
means that it can be challenging to ascertain every single
regulatory and/or legislative framework with which you need
to ensure compliance. As a rule of thumb, in the context of
cryptoassets and blockchain, when seeking to mitigate
against financial crime risks and adhering to important
regulatory standards, the core frameworks that ought to be
considered are:
e The Money Laundering, Terrorist Financing and Transfer
of Funds (Information on the Payer) Regulations 2017
(MLRs)
¢ Authorisation under the Financial Services and Markets
Act (FSMA)
e Electronic Money Regulations (EMRs) and the Payment
Service Regulations (PSRs)
e Sanctions Regime under the Sanctions and Anti-Money
Laundering Act (SAMLA) and various implementing
Orders
e The Financial Promotions Regime (covered elsewhere in
this guide)
¢ Data Protection/GDPR (covered in the Product, Data and
Compliance by Design section)
AML registration with the UK Financial
Conduct Authority (FCA)
The MLRs are an important tool in the combatting of financial
crime and money laundering. The MLRs were extended to
certain types of cryptoasset businesses in January 2020,
pursuant to which: (i) “cryptoasset exchange providers”; and
(ii) “custodian wallet providers” (both as defined in 14A of the
MLRs) are required to register with the FCA for supervision of
their AML processes.
Many cryptoasset service providers ‘CASPs’/Exchanges will,
therefore, need to comply with the registration requirement in
order to deliver services into the UK. To successfully apply for
registration, applicants will need to demonstrate robust AML
controls including the following:
Risk Assessment:
« Acomprehensive business-wide risk assessment
¢ Individual customer risk profiling
e Geographic risk considerations
Customer Due Diligence (CDD):
e Verification of customer identity
e Enhanced due diligence for high-risk customers
e Ongoing monitoring of transactions
Operational Controls:
e Appointment of a Money Laundering Reporting Officer
¢ Staff training programs
e Suspicious activity reporting procedures
e Record-keeping systems
There is a substantial amount of guidance around what
constitutes a custodian wallet provider or an exchange. It is
not uncommon for a business to believe that it is not caught
within the definition under Regulation 14A because for
example, it purports to only provide self-custody wallets
when in fact as part of its broader business there may
actually be custodian services attached which bring it in
scope.   Page 59 - 
Similarly, a cryptoasset business might provide ancillary
services which bring it in scope: for example, a crypto
remittance business that might as part of its services include
an exchange service to enable customers to change USDT to
ETH before remitting the ETH. It is imperative that legal
advice is obtained on the entire business model and
customer journey to ascertain whether registration is
required.
Authorisation under FSMA
FSMA establishes the regulatory perimeter, that is the
boundary which delineates between regulated activities for
which FCA authorisation is required, and unregulated
activities for which FCA authorisation is not required
(although other legal and regulatory rules may also apply).
Broadly speaking, the need for authorisation is likely
triggered, subject to applicable exclusions and exemptions,
where you are: (1) conducting specified activities, (2) involving
specified investments, (3) by way of business, and (4) from or
in the UK.
Currently, cryptoassets are not expressly included in the
definition of specified investments for the purposes of
regulation under the specified activities regime (note however
that they are included as 'qualifying cryptoassets' under the
financial promotions regime), however, the FCA has by way
of guidance created a taxonomy by which some cryptoassets
are capable of being treated akin to specified investments
and consequently capable of falling within the regulatory
perimeter if there are specified activities undertaken in
respect of them (i.e. traditional financial services such as
arranging deals in investments, managing investments,
advising on investments etc.,) by way of business in or from
the UK. To achieve this, the FCA categorises cryptoassets
into regulated and unregulated tokens:
• Regulated tokens - primarily security tokens and e-
money tokens;
• Unregulated tokens —primarily utility tokens and
exchange tokens.
27 Cryptoasset Regulation Roadmap, Financial Conduct Authority, (last visited 27 November 2024)
The FCA supports a substance over form approach and will
classify a token as a security token, and consequently
capable of being caught within the perimeter, if they:
• Have characteristics similar to traditional securities;
• Provide rights like ownership, repayment of money, or
profit share;
• Are transferable and tradeable on capital markets.
Similarly, the FCA will deem a token to be an E-Money Token
if they:
• Meet the definition of electronic money under EMRs;
• Maintain stable value pegged to fiat currency;
• Are used for payment.
Some stablecoins might fall within this definition and it is
understood that there are future plans to include stablecoins
within the definition of e-money under the EMRs. The FCA's
crypto roadmap published on 25 November 2024 states that
the FCA aims to consult on its regulatory approach to
stablecoins in Ql/Q2 2025. 27
Unregulated Tokens remain outside the perimeter when they:
• Are primarily used for exchange;
• Don't provide rights similar to regulated investments;
• Function as utility tokens for accessing services.
From a compliance perspective, it is essential that careful
analysis is undertaken to correctly classify tokens. When
considering whether a business is engaging in authorised
activity, the FCA will look beyond any superficial labels that
are given to an activity and will look at the substance of what
is happening to determine whether regulated activity is being
undertaken. They will, for example, closely examine whether
a token is indeed a utility token or whether in fact it is
behaving as a security, and may ask probing questions about
the operation of the business to help with their assessment.
Advice should always be obtained as to whether
authorisation is required as the position is not always clear.
There is, for example, substantial case law around the
meaning and application of the different statutory criteria for
determining whether authorisation is required.
Where authorisation is required, you may need to engage
services of compliance consultancies and law firms to
prepare the various documents needed for an authorisation
application, such as policies and procedures, a detailed
business plan and detail on key personnel and how they
satisfy FCA requirements.

Page 60 - 
The authorisation process can be lengthy and will usually
take a minimum of 6 months if everything goes smoothly. It is
also important to note that you cannot undertake authorised
business before obtaining authorisation as this is a criminal
offence under FSMA; this can sometimes be alleviated by the
introduction of temporary licence regimes, but again careful
assessment is required to determine what activities can be
done while authorisations are being sought.
Sanctions
Electronic Money
Regulations / Payment
Service Regulations
The question of whether activities are subject to regulation
under the EMRs and/or the PSRs largely depends on whether
the cryptoassets, supported by the business/platform, meet
the legal definition of "electronic money" (e-money). Activities
relating to the transfer of e-money are regulated under the
PSRs; operating a platform which facilitates the transfer of e-
money from one person to another is likely to fall in scope
and require a Payment Institution (PI) licence by virtue of it
being money remittance which is a payment service under
the PSR.
A cryptoasset business will require an Electronic Money
Institution (EMI) licence if it is issuing "money", this would be
the case where it is issuing tokens which meet the definition
of e-money. There is currently much discussion around
whether stablecoins meet the definition of e-money and
there are legislative plans to bring stablecoins within the
definition of e-money and, consequently, within scope of the
EMR and PSR.
Careful consideration should be given to the types of tokens
that are supported by a platform, particularly where the
businesses services include the issue or transfer/remittance of
tokens.
There are many similarities between an authorisation
application under FSMA and an application for an EMI or PI
licence and advice should be obtained - by reference to a
detailed review of the business and customer journey - to
assess whether (and which) licences are required and the
content of the application.
Individuals and legal entities who are within or undertake
activities within the UK's territory must comply with UK
financial sanctions that are in force; therefore, overseas
companies operating in the UK are caught. UK incorporated
entities are subject to UK requirements relating to sanctions
and the prevention of terrorist financing irrespective of where
they are operating. This applies regardless of the regulatory/
compliance status discussed above; however, it is worth
flagging that additional requirements apply to firms within the
scope of the regulatory regimes referred to above.
There are a wide range of economic sanctions imposed by
the UK on various countries/political regimes and specialist
advice should always be obtained if there are concerns about
whether business activities might breach sanctions.
Businesses should be particularly mindful of sanctions
imposing asset freezes on designated persons (individuals
and entities). Broadly, asset freezes imposed by the UK
operate to prohibit:
• making funds or economic resources available, directly or
indirectly, to, or for the benefit of, a designated person or
to a person who is owned or controlled directly or
indirectly by the designated person;
• dealing with the frozen funds or economic resources,
belonging to or owned, held or controlled by a
designated person or to a person who is owned or
controlled directly or indirectly by the designated person;
• engaging in actions that, directly or indirectly, circumvent
the sanctions prohibitions.
As a matter of good and robust financial hygiene, businesses
should implement AML and sanctions policies which set out
the procedures and policies in place to ensure that users are
adequately screened, and that sanctions and broader money
laundering risks are mitigated. From the UK perspective, this
approach should also be taken by blockchain/cryptoasset
businesses. To support this view, guidance on the regulatory
expectations in respect of crypto firms was given in a "Joint
statement from UK financial regulatory authorities on
sanctions and the cryptoasset sector" (March 2022). Some
key expectations to note are:

Page 61 - 
• where blockchain analytics solutions are deployed,
ensuring that compliance teams understand how these
capabilities can be best used to identify transactions
linked to higher risk wallet addresses;
• updating business-wide and customer risk assessments to
account for changes in the nature and type of sanctions
measures,
• ensuring that customer onboarding and due diligence
processes identify customers who make use of corporate
vehicles to obscure ownership or source of funds;
• ensuring that customers and their transactions are
screened against relevant updated sanctions lists and that
effective re-screening is in place to identify activity that
may indicate sanctions breaches.
Businesses should also look for red flag indicators that
suggest an increased risk of sanctions evasion. These may
include:
• the use of tools designed to obfuscate the location of the
customer (e.g. an IP address associated with a virtual
private network or proxy) or the source of cryptoassets
(e.g. mixers and tumblers);
• transactions to or from a wallet address associated with a
sanctioned entity, or a wallet address otherwise deemed
to be high-risk, based on its transaction history or that of
associated addresses, or other factors;
• transactions involving a cryptoasset exchange or
custodian wallet provider known to have poor customer
due diligence procedures or which is otherwise deemed
high-risk.
There are also some special reporting duties for cryptoasset
exchange providers and custodian wallet providers which
require them to report to OFSI where they know or suspect a
person is a designated person or has committed sanctions
offences.
It is always sensible to obtain legal or regulatory advice
around the implementation of policies and procedures to
address sanctions and broader AML/financial crime risks.
There is a lot of value in carrying out this exercise robustly as
demonstrating good governance and processes is an
important aspect of most licensing and authorisation
applications.

UK REGULATION OF THE
FINANCIAL PROMOTION
OF GRYPTOASSETS
(Andrew Maguire - Littleton Chambers)Page 63 - 

Page 64 - 
Cryptoassets have been the subject of increased scrutiny
during the last couple of years, with both the Government
and the FCA having previously expressed concern about ‘the
wild west’ of crypto promotions, within the context of
increased regulation taking place in other jurisdictions. On 26
November 2024, the FCA has published its “roadmap”,
which outlines planned FCA policy publications for
cryptoassets where the FCA are seeking feedback and the
content they are expected to cover, concerning the
regulation of crypto: see crypto roadmap.
On 7 June 2023, the UK Parliament passed the Financial
Services and Markets Act 2000 (Financial Promotion)
(Amendment) Order 2023, which brought cryptoassets within
the scope of the regulatory framework which regulates the
marketing of financial products in the UK. This legislation
amended the Financial Services and Markets Act (Financial
Promotion) Order 2005 (‘FPO’), extending it to cryptoassets
with effect from 8 October 2023. The FPO defines the
investments and activities captured by the financial
promotions regime as well as related exemptions.
A key component of financial regulation is the control over
the manner in which investment products are marketed and
promoted to the general public, by the Financial Conduct
Authority’s authorisation of firms marketing regulated
products to the general public. In more recent times, scams
perpetrated via social and digital media have increased
exponentially. The UK Government has been keen to ensure
that the regulatory framework is fit for purpose and relevant
to the recent technological developments.
Section 21 of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000
(‘FSMA) provides that a person must not, in the course of
business, communicate an invitation or inducement to
engage in investment activity or to engage in claims
management activity unless the promotion has been made or
approved by an authorised person or it is exempt. This article
does not deal with claims management activity which is a
separate topic.
Therefore, a financial promotion is defined as any
communication that either invites or induces a person to
engage in investment activity that is communicated in the
course of a business: see s.21 of FSMA and FCA’s Perimeter
Guidance Manual (‘PERG’) at PERG 8.1.1. [emphasis added]
Guidance on the FCA’s interpretation of the financial
promotion restrictions and the applicable exemptions from
the regime is contained in chapter 8 of PERG, which is
intended to represent the FCA's views. Although not strictly
binding on the courts, in practice, it is usually of persuasive
effect to judges determining financial promotion regulatory
issues, as recent case law has shown. This Guidance applies
to persons who need to know whether their communications
are subject to, or comply with, s.21 of FSMA; namely, whether
their activities, in making or helping others to make financial
promotions, are regulated activities. The scale of the risk is
underscored by the fact that a breach of s.21 is a criminal
offence, carrying a penalty of imprisonment for up to two
years and or an unlimited fine or both.
In considering whether any communication relating to
financial promotions is captured by the prohibition in s. 2.1 of
FSMA, the following five questions ought to be considered:
(i) is a communication being made or caused to be made?
(ii) is the communication an invitation or inducement to
engage in investment activity? (iii) is the communication
made in the course of a business?
(iv) does the communication originate from outside the UK
and, if so, is it capable of having an effect in the United
Kingdom?
(v) does the communication fall within one of the exemptions
contained in the FPO?
If the communication satisfies the first four questions listed
above, and there is no applicable exemption, then the
financial promotion will have to be communicated or
approved by an authorised person in compliance with the
applicable financial promotion rules (depending on the type
of investment product).
A number of exemptions exist, namely that either:
(i) the person is authorised under FSMA in accordance with
section 31 of FSMA; or
(ii) the content of the communication has been approved by
an authorised person that is a permitted approver in
accordance with the FCA rules; or
(iii) the communication is covered by an exemption pursuant
to the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (Financial
Promotion) Order 2005, as amended: or

Page 65 -
 iv) there is (currently) a time limited exemption for certain
crypto asset businesses who are registered with the FCA
under the Money Laundering, Terrorist Financing and
Transfer of Funds (Information on the Payer) Regulations 2017
(‘MLR 2017’); as from 8 October 2023.
The guidance in PERG8 provides useful insights into the
question of whether any communication is likely to be held to
be an invitation or inducement to engage in investment
activity, such as the following random examples: web links;
advertisements; communications by employers to their
employees; invitations to attend meetings or to receive
telephone calls or visits, investment trading methods and
training courses; advertisements inviting contact with the
advertiser; image advertising; performance tables; company
statements and announcements.
In addition, PERG8 provides guidance on what it means to
communicate financial promotions; in practice, a person will
need to have taken active steps to make the communication,
which will be a key question of fact. The FCA take the view
that a person is making a communication where they give
material to the recipient or are responsible for transmitting
the material on behalf of a person. Thus, if a person
knowingly were to leave a copy of a document where it is
likely that people will pick up such copies (who may seek to
act on the information contained in those documents), that
person will be communicating the content of that document.
PERG8 also distinguishes between a communication which is
made to another person, such as if it is addressed verbally or
in legible forms and a communication which is directed at
one or more persons if it is addressed to persons generally,
such as a television broadcast or a website: this distinction
becomes important when the issue of exemptions is being
considered.
The requirement, in s.21(1) FSMA, that only invitations or
inducements communicated in the course of a business are
regulated is not restricted to those carrying out regulated
activities. Therefore, anyone who carries on a business that is
not a regulated activity, should be careful when making
communications, that may amount to financial promotions, if
they seek to persuade or invite others to engage in
investment activity.
Restrictions cover both written and oral communications.
However, the exemptions in the FPO draw distinctions
between real time and non-real time and solicited and
unsolicited communications.
This is because consumers are believed to be more likely to
be influenced into buying a product as a result of high-
pressure sales tactics during unsolicited telephone or face to
face, real time discussions, so that such activities are thus
subject to greater regulation.
The territorial scope of the financial promotions regime in the
UK will depend on issues such as the location of both the
communicator and the recipient of the promotion. In general,
any promotion with the UK link, be that an incoming or
outgoing communication, will be caught. Such restrictions
will apply its promotions to recipients located in the United
Kingdom, subject to exemptions, and under section 21(3) of
FSMA any promotions originating outside the UK will also fall
within the restriction, if they are capable of having an effect
in the United Kingdom.
Financial promotions by authorised persons are not subject
to the financial promotion restriction in s.21. However,
authorised persons must ensure that any financial promotion
they communicate must comply with the relevant financial
promotion rules. The financial promotion approval gateway
introduced in 2023, replaced the previous regime under
FSMA that allowed an authorised person to approve the
financial promotion of an unauthorised person for the
purposes of s.21. Under the new gateway a financial
promotion requirement automatically applies to all authorised
firms that have not applied for and be granted approval
permission by the FCA. Under s.21, the content of the
financial promotion can only be approved by an authorised
person who either:
(i) is a permitted approval in relation to the financial
promotion; or
(ii) falls within the scope of an approver permission
exemption, as set out in the FSMA 2000 (Exemptions from
Financial Promotion General Requirement) Regulations 2023,
which allows an authorised person to approve its own
financial promotion without requiring permission.
The many exemptions to financial promotion restrictions are
too wide-ranging and varied to accurately set out in this brief
article, as there are over 70. Specialist regulatory advice
ought to be obtained from expert lawyers in relation to such
exemptions; particularly given that a wrong decision in
regards whether an exemption applies or not could have
literally catastrophic consequences to the individual and the
entire business.

Page 66 - 
Some examples of decision making, in corporate activity,
regarding whether a financial promotion is being
communicated, arise in the following circumstances,
especially where outside investment is being sought which
give rise to all such communications being compliant with
the regulatory regime: press presentations; the publication of
company annual reports and accounts; the distribution of
analysts research reports in the marketing of an initial public
offering; the publication of a prospectus for listed securities;
companies promoting either the buyback of its shares for
holding in treasury or the sale of treasury shares;
communicating with employees regarding employee share
schemes; or unlisted companies promoting investment in its
business to private equity funds.
Financial promotions, involving consumers, cover a wide
range of material including stationery, shop fronts, faxes,
leaflets, newspaper advertisements, emails, text messages,
hyperlinks, sponsored links and banner advertising, websites,
TV and radio commercials and increasingly communications
via digital and social media; such as blogs, microblogs such
as X, social networks such as Facebook, LinkedIn, Google+,
forums, image and video sharing platforms such as YouTube
and Instagram.
An illegal financial promotion is one communicated in breach
of s21. For example, an unauthorised influencer
communicating a financial promotion without approval from
an appropriate authorised person and where no FPO
exemption applies.
An example of an invitation might be as simple as: “Invest in
[A] Ltd’s share sale by completing the attached application
form”. An example of an inducement might be: “[A] Ltd’s
growth to date has been spectacular and that growth is
expected to continue”.
Therefore, the following examples would be likely to breach
the applicable rules and be in essence criminal behaviour:
(i) an influencer is directly compensated by a firm and issues
posts encouraging followers to use the firm’s services;
(ii) an influencer is not currently employed by a firm but is
promoting a firm’s services to generate revenue from a
relationship with the firm in the future;
(iii) an influencer is promoting the services of a firm on a
social media platform in a bid to acquire more views and
attention for their content. They are then directly
compensated by the social media platform for the views they
acquire;
(iv) an influencer is promoting the services of a firm but only
to try to acquire more followers and likes. They will then use
the increased followers and likes to ask for a higher fee in
future brand deals with firms;
(v) person A is promoting chatroom B which they run to
promote investment products. They have a commercial
relationship with firm C who sells investment products;
(vi) person A is promoting investment products on a social
media platform to lead people to a chatroom centred around
investing that they run or are involved in running. They gain a
monetary benefit from the success of the chatroom, for
example by selling courses about investing;
(vii) an influencer promotes the services of a firm through an
affiliate link. When a consumer clicks the link and purchases
the product the influencer will be directly compensated for
their purchase.
Activities that are less likely to be captured by the regulatory
regime are myriad, such that it is almost impossible to
generalise, as the wording of each communication would
need to be considered in isolation. However, some random
high-level examples of communications are as follows:
(i) those which are purely profile raising and which do not
identify and promote particular investments or investment
services may not amount to either an invitation or
inducement of any kind. Examples of this include where listed
companies sponsor sporting events or simply put their name
or logo on the side of a bus or on an umbrella;
(ii) statements of fact about a company’s performance or
activities may not, in themselves, be inducements to engage
in investment activity even if they may lead persons to decide
to buy or sell the company’s shares. However, statements
which speculate about the company’s future performance or
its share price may have an underlying purpose or intent to
encourage investors to act.
These few examples starkly demonstrate that seeking expert
advice is prudent, as compliance with s.21 is mandatory;
there is no “best endeavours” defence available: the
underlying policy requirement is for firms to unconditionally
comply with the legal framework. This may require the
obtaining of expert advice, if any doubt arises as to the
lawfulness of a proposed communication. Increasingly, in the
crypto space, such compliance is increasingly sought by
potential investors, many of whom will be aware of the
calamities that have arisen in the unregulated crypto market.

Page 67 - 
TAX, VAT AND
ACCOUNTING
Dion Seymour - Andersen LLP ;
Mark Pearce - Alkimi

Page 68 - 
Important note: The content in this section, including
any rates and thresholds mentioned, changes very
quickly and is highly subject to variation based on
individual circumstances. This is a guide for general
information purposes only and it is extremely important
to engage a professional advisor for advice on your
particular circumstances.
All guidance in this section, including any details of rates,
refers only to the position in England and Wales on the
date of publication of this guide. Please seek specific
guidance on Scotland and Northern Ireland, where
relevant to your project.
The 5 W’s
(Mark Pearce - Alkimi)
Why should | read this?
The UK tax system is constantly being reformed and is still
very vague on how tax should apply to digital assets or
“crypto”.
This section summarises some of the key issues that founders
will need to consider when launching a crypto project. The
following section by Dion Seymour provides more detail on
the key topics but readers should bear in mind that there are
currently over 17,000 pages of tax legislation that are
constantly being changed and updated so it is vital that
founders take advice from a suitable professional.
Failure to comply with your tax responsibilities can lead to
various sanctions including, at their most extreme, a prison
sentence. It is each person’s responsibility to file their tax
returns correctly and ignorance is not considered a defence.
Who am |?
The first question that founders need to ask themselves is the
nature of the entity that is going to run the project. In the UK
there are three main options, a company, a partnership or as
an individual.
A company?
Establishing a company is the most common option. It is
relatively simple and cheap to establish a company in the
UK. A company is a separate legal entity, which is run by
directors who are subject to various powers retained by
shareholders (for example shareholders often have the power
to appoint and remove directors). This can allow founders to
appoint experts to help run their company but with the
protection that they can remove those directors in the future
if necessary.
While it is possible for people living in the UK to establish
companies in a number of jurisdictions the UK has detailed
anti-avoidance rules that will often bring profits of foreign
companies established or managed by UK residents within
the scope of UK taxation. Founders wishing to establish
companies outside the UK should ensure they take detailed
advice both in the UK and the intended county of
establishment so they can be confident of understanding all
the tax and regulatory requirements that will apply to them.
Founders of UK crypto companies should also consider with
their accountants whether they can take advantage of various
tax incentives or rebates such as EIS/SEIS, R&D credits or
VAT recovery.
A partnership?
Partnerships can, themselves, take various forms such as
general, limited or limited liability partnerships. If a
partnership is set up outside the UK there are often even
more choices available and, again, separate advice will need
to be sought. Many, but not all, partnerships are taxed
similarly to companies or individuals so this guide will focus
predominately on these two options.
An individual?
It is not a legal necessity for an individual to run a project as a
company or in a partnership. If a project is the brain-child of
one person then it is possible for that person to manage the
project as an individual or sole-trader. While being a sole-
trader might incur the least initial legal and accounting costs
a person acting as a sole-trader could face a number of
difficulties quite quickly. The major concern for many
founders is the potential liabilities that may apply to
individuals that might not necessarily apply to companies. It
is possible for people acting as sole-traders subsequently to
incorporate their business but this may incur more costs than
were saved by not incorporating initially.

Page 69 - 
Where am I?
The UK generally levies taxes based on the location (or situs
in legal parlance) of both the relevant person and the source
of taxable return. For individuals living in the UK they will
generally be regarded as UK resident for taxation. The UK
has a fairly prescriptive statutory residence test, which allows
individuals to calculate whether or not they are UK
resident.28 Individuals born outside the UK should consider
their domestic tax regime as well as any relevant double tax
treaties.2 Companies are generally resident where they are
incorporated but non-UK resident companies can be taxed in
the UK if they are managed from the UK or have a
permanent establishment in the UK.
Where is my crypto?
As for the situs of crypto, the UK's default position is that
crypto is situated where the person owning the crypto is
resident. It is arguable if this is completely accurate,
especially when one considers cold wallets and closed
networks, but serves as a statement of general principle. 30
What tax is charged?
To determine what tax is charged it is necessary to consider
whether a receipt is income or capital gain in nature. There is
no definitive test for all scenarios that can exist but as a
general rule income is often regular in nature or deriving
from a trade while capital gain is often realised on the sale of
an asset. Common forms of income include salaries,
contractor payments and rewards such as might arise from
staking. The sale of an asset or the conversion of one type of
an asset to another is more usually capital.
The distinction between income and capital gain is less
relevant for companies as they are subject to corporation tax
rather than income or capital gains tax. The distinction is,
though, important for certain reliefs and rebates so your
accountant should keep accurate records of whether a return
is income or capital.
For individuals, there is a significant difference currently
between the tax rates that can apply to income (up to 45% at
the time of writing) and capital gains tax (up to 24%). As
such, determining whether a return is income or capital can
lead to a significant difference in the tax due.
It is also worth noting that inheritance tax might be charged if
you own assets on death, such as direct crypto holdings or
shares in a company, or if you make certain lifetime transfers
of assets. Inheritance tax is not likely to be relevant to many
founders so this guide does not consider this further.
Finally, other, discrete taxes might apply in specific
circumstances. For example, if you employ staff or pay
yourself a salary then national insurance contributions may
fall due. Certain contracts you enter into may be subject to
VAT and if you incorporate a business you may be able to
reclaim any VAT that you have spent.
When is tax charged on my crypto
Income tax
If you receive a salary, including a bonus, then your income
tax is likely to be deducted by the paying company before
you receive the income through PAYE. PAYE is often a 'best
guess' as to your tax liability and when you come to complete
your tax return you may find that there is some more tax to
pay or, alternatively, a tax repayment owed to you. However,
this is not something you need to calculate until it is
necessary to file your tax return. Other forms of income will
need to be declared in your tax return.
Capital gains
Capital gains are also declared in your tax return so it is
important to know what is a chargeable disposal for capital
gains tax purposes. In essence, the conversion of any asset
to another asset is a chargeable disposal that may give rise to
a gain or a loss. These gains or losses must be calculated in
GBP meaning that you may also need to consider fluctuating
exchange rates to ascertain whether a disposal gives rise to a
profit or a loss.
HMRC regards all crypto as being a separate asset meaning
that changing from one crypto token to another token should
be recorded as a disposal. It is the subject of much
academic debate but this could even apply whether you go
from a token such as ETH to a wrapped version such as
WETH. Below is a simplified, illustrative example showing
how much detail founders should record, which hopefully
highlights the need for accurate book keeping from the
outset.
28 Guidance Note for Statutory Residence Test (SRT) (RDR3), UK Government (22 January 2020) |
29 Tax Treaties, UK Government (28 July 2014)
30 CRYPTO22600 - Cryptoassets for individuals: Capital Gains Tax: determining the location of exchange tokens, HM Revenue & Customs (21 August 2023)

Page 70 - 
Date
06.04.24
13.06.24
22.08.24
07.12.24
14.02.25
05.05.25
TOTAL
From
GBP
USDT
ETH
$Founder
$BTC
$USDT
To
USDT
ETH
$Founder
$BTC
$USDT
GBP
From value
£10000
$12,000
$18,000
$90,000
$80,000
$80,000
To value
$12,000
$12,000
$18,000
$90,000
$80,000
£72,727
GBP-USD
1:1.2
1:1.13
1:1.25
1:1.15
1:1.2
1:1.1
Total Gain
0
£620
£3,780
£63,860
-£11,594
£6,061
The important point to note here is that even though from a
USD perspective there was no gain or loss on the 13 June
2024 transaction, because the GBP:USD exchange rate had
changed since 6 April 2024 a taxable gain was still realised.
Corporation tax
Each company will have its own accounting period after
which it will need to file accounts (usually 12 months after the
end of an accounting period) and pay tax (usually 9 months
after the end of the accounting period).
Uk companies may wish to consider aligning their
accounting period to the UK tax year (6 April to the following
5 April) but if, for example, the company is heavily US
focussed it may wish to align it more to the US tax year (1
January to 31 December).

Page 71- 
Overview of Tax and Accounting for Crypto
Projects (Dion Seymour - Andersen UK)
1. The UK crypto tax landscape
There is no 'crypto tax' law. Cryptoasset transactions are
nonetheless taxable. Existing tax laws and principles must be
applied to cryptoassets in the same way as they do to other
assets.
There are a number of different taxes that may apply to you
and your business. The main taxes that you will need to
consider are Income Tax (IT), Capital Gains Tax (CGT)
Corporation Tax (CT) and Value Added Tax (VAT).
IT, CGT and CT are called "direct taxes" as the tax is charged
against income, capital gains or profits arising from a
particular activity (e.g. employment income, investment gains
or trading profits). VAT, by comparison is known as an
"indirect" tax because it is charged on "consumption" (i.e. on
the goods or services being "consumed" and not the
activity).
HMRC publishes tax guidance (called manuals) to help
taxpayers understand what they must do. However, multiple
manuals covering different taxes and a targeted cryptoasset
manual means that assessing one's tax position can feel like
searching for a needle in a haystack. That said, the manuals
are very helpful in understanding HMRC's opinion on topics,
although it is just HMRC's view, and there may be alternative
positions.
An online platform for engaging with HMRC, covering
registration to submitting tax returns, is available through the
Government Gateway at Gov.UK. This can be used for all the
main taxes, including IT, CGT, CT, and VAT. It is important to
note that there are deadlines for registration with HMRC, and
if these are not met, HMRC may charge penalties.
2. Important dates
You are responsible for the completion of and ensuring that
tax returns are submitted on time and are accurate. The
system is generally referred to as "self-assessment" as you
assess the due tax and report (and pay) that to HMRC. HMRC
operates a "process now, check later" approach to taxation.
This means that HMRC does not actively check each and
every tax return, however, they do undertake compliance
reviews to ensure that tax returns for individuals and
businesses are complete and accurate.
2.1 Income and capital gains tax
IT and CGT self assessment (SA) is a way of reporting
income/profit/gains and paying tax to HMRC. This is for
individuals and also applies to the self-employed or a partner
in a partnership. Any capital gains from selling cryptoassets
must also be included in the SA return. Anyone earning
income outside of PAYE or CT must complete an SA tax
return.
The key dates for SA tax returns are:
• 5 October - register for SA for the first time
• 31 October - submit paper tax return
• 31 January - submit online tax return
2.2 Corporation tax
To register as a company, one must also submit an annual
return to Companies House and an annual tax return to
HMRC. CT self-assessment is relevant for companies, and the
key dates for CT Self Assessment are based on the periods in
the accounts, also called the accounting period. The
submission date for the CT tax return, called the CT600, is 12
months after the end of the accounting period. There is a
separate deadline to pay the CT bill, which is usually 9
months and one day after the end of the accounting period.
2.3 VAT
You must register your business if it makes "Vatable" supplies
exceeding £90,000.
If your business makes supplies that are in the scope of VAT
and the taxable turnover for the last 12 months goes over
£90,000 or you expect your taxable turnover to exceed
£90,000 in the next 30 days, registration must be
completed within 30 days of the end of the month when the
threshold was exceeded.

Page 72 - 
The effective date of registration is the first day of the second
month after exceeding the threshold.
You also need to register if the business is based outside the
UK and supply any goods or services to the UK.
Unlike CT or IT, which are annual returns, VAT periods are
quarterly, and the VAT return needs to be submitted by the
end of the following month.
Several VAT accounting schemes are available, such as the
flat rate scheme, which can simplify the calculation of VAT,
and the Annual Accounting scheme, which requires a VAT
return to only be submitted once a year. There are conditions
applied to the schemes and these may not be suitable for all
businesses.
3. UK regulated start-ups
A UK regulated start up is one that has the necessary
registrations with the FCA (and other relevant regulatory
bodies). The UK company is permitted to conduct its
business and crypto transactions in the UK.
3.1 Trading v. investment
The first matter to assess is whether the company is investing
or trading in crypto.
Often, when cryptoassets are bought and sold, this is
described as "trading". However, the term has a different
meaning when it comes to taxes. For direct tax, there is a
difference between trading (buying and selling crypto) and
the meaning of trading for tax purposes.
For tax purposes, trading is a "venture in the nature of trade."
This is an old phrase from case law that describes, essentially,
a business. That does not mean that trading in crypto is also
a "venture in the nature of trade." This is important as profit
from a business can have different tax implications.
Typically, the buying and selling of crypto will be treated as
an investment activity. Any profits from transactions are
known as chargeable gains and are liable to corporation tax,
with losses being offset against the gains.
However, where the company is actively trading in
cryptoassets with a sophisticated level of operation, such as
personnel, algorithmic bots etc. and a clear profit motive, it
may be treated as a financial trader.
This is important to note when it comes to loss relief. Whilst
chargeable gains and trading profits are both taxable to
corporation tax (i.e. the same tax rate), there is a difference in
how losses are treated for corporation tax. Trading losses can
offset against both capital gains and other trading profits
arising in the same period, or be carried forward for offset in
future periods. Capital losses can only be offset against
capital gains, and where they exceed available gains in a
given period, they are carried forward to offset against future
capital gains only.
Transaction fees will be considered within any cryptoasset
transactions as these will be treated as an allowable cost
where they are for the acquisition or disposal of an asset for
the business.
3.2 Accounting
Companies must complete financial statements each year for
submission at Companies House under accounting
standards. These are due to be filed with the registrar 9
months following the company's year-end.
UK accounting standards (FRS) consider most cryptoassets to
be an "intangible asset" which is a "non-monetary" asset.
Whilst many users might consider cryptoasset to be cash or
investments, treatment as an intangible asset creates unique
issues for accounting purposes that need to be considered.
This includes the cost basis for including as an asset, tracking
unrealised and realised gains on the disposal of cryptoassets,
whether assets can be revalued if there is a sufficient active
market and liquidity) and how often revaluations take place.
Unless a business disposes of cryptoassets immediately on
receipt, there is likely to be a gain or loss that crystalises on
disposal. This, along with the cost basis for intangibles, also
needs to be recorded.
It is therefore important to consider suitable software to track
onchain movements both for accounting purposes and tax
calculations, and matters can escalate in complication
quickly.
Any goods or services purchased using cryptoassets would
be recorded at the value of those assets at the time of
disposal. Where these are incurred for business purposes,
they are deducted from income in order to calculate the level
of profits that are subject to corporation tax.

Page 73 - 
To transfer cryptoassets there is typically some form of "gas"
fees fees paid to validators of transactions on the
blockchain). The gas fees are payable in cryptoassets (usually
in the same cryptoasset as the transaction), and this, too, is a
disposal (i.e. any gain or loss in the crypto needs to be
recognised). However, the gas fee would be a tax-deductible
expense for the business.
Aside from accounting principles, it is highly recommended
that businesses consider the value held in cryptoassets, as
well as the liquidity of the business. Where cryptoassets are
received from services performed, those cryptoassets are
valued for accounting and tax purposes at their market value
at the time of receipt. When markets suffer, if the liquidity is
held in cryptoassets, the business may be required to make
disposals for fiat, which could make it difficult to settle taxes
due.
3.3 VAT
To date, limited guidance has been released from HMRC on
the implications of VAT on cryptoassets. However, the CJEU
(Court of Justice of the European Union) was one of the first
courts to consider the implications of tax on cryptoassets. In
the case of C-264/14 Skatteverket v David Hedqvist, the CUEU
considered that exchanging Bitcoin for fiat currency (and visa
versa) was considered to be an exempt supply on the basis
that it was a supply of financial services. It should be noted
that only Bitcoin was considered presenting uncertainty if
there is no fiat currency involved (i.e. cryptoasset to
cryptoasset transactions) the treatment would be the same.
VAT is charged on the supply of goods and services with VAT
liability following the activity. Cryptoassets, such as SOL, are
neither a good nor a service in their own right. Therefore, a
business selling cryptoassets would not add VAT to their sale
as they are not a good (i.e. they do not have a physical form).
They would, however, add VAT to the charge for providing
that service.
For VAT to apply, there must also be a clear link to the
customer and the service being provided. Where a business
undertakes mining the activity does not constitute an
economic activity as there is not a sufficient link between the
service and the consideration (the fees that have been
received) for providing that service as there is no clear
customer.
A great example of the complexities that can arise when
applying existing VAT principles to cryptoasset transactions is
the application to NFTs. As NFTs can cover a wide range of
uses this means identification of what is being supplied must
be considered on a case-by-case basis. Some EU
jurisdictions have stated that the supply of a 'jpeg' NFT is a
service and, if that is correct, it follows that the treatment
would follow the rules of electronically provided services
(ESS). For B2C transactions, this would require the seller to
register for VAT in their customer's location. Of course, many
NFT projects do not know where the seller is located. Some
jurisdictions, such as Spain, will treat all sales as to Spanish
customers unless evidence can be provided to the contrary.
There has been a mixed approach from HMRC in some cases
adopting a similar position in Spain and in others (incorrectly)
treating the NFT as a security and exempt from VAT!
Whilst NFT jpegs may have had their day, NFTs have multiple
use cases not least to represent real world assets (RWAs) or
intangible property. This means that not all NFT sales should
be considered as providing a service. As VAT follows the
liability of the goods or services, selling RWAs that are
VATable in the "real world" should also be VATable if they are
tokenised. There is no clear guidance from HMRC on
whether or not this is the case.
For the UK business, it is important to consider the VAT
consequences of their NFTs' attributes at the design stage
—as it may be possible to secure more certainty or efficient
VAT outcome with some changes.There may well be other
indirect taxes, for example, NFTs representing real estate or
shares in a UK company owning real estate as Stamp Duty
Land Tax (SDLT) or Stamp Duty Reserve Tax (SDRT) may be
due.
4. UK unregulated start-ups using offshore
regulated entities
The current UK regulatory landscape means that many web3
start ups are unable to carry on their business in the UK. A
common regulatory solution is to set up an offshore entity in
a more favourable regulatory environment to undertake the
crypto transactions, even if the people running the business
are not offshore.
However, a common misconception is that if a company is
established outside of the UK there can be no tax liability in
the UK. This is incorrect. A UK resident individual or company
is subject to UK tax on their worldwide income and gains.

Page 74 - 
4.1 Out of the fire and into the frying pan - 100 years of
anti-tax avoidance
Whilst the regulatory solution may be simple, this usually
catapults the business and/or its founders into complex tax
issues, the types of issues that have been traditionally
reserved for large well-funded multinational groups, not
bootstrapped start-ups!
The UK has 100 years of anti-tax avoidance rules and case
law that prevent such persons from creating offshore
companies in low or no tax jurisdictions, with little or no
substance (i.e. no local people functions), and parking profits
there with a view to avoiding UK tax.
Broadly, these anti-avoidance rules will deem the income,
gains or profits (depending on which set of rules apply) to
belong to the UK resident person on an arising basis (i.e.
even if not distributed).
The main anti-avoidance rules to consider include:
• Transfer of Assets Abroad (ToAA)
• Profit Fragmentation (PFrag)
• Controlled foreign companies (CFC)
• Transfer pricing (TP)
• Intangible fixed asset (IFA) regime.
Whilst the rationale for offshoring is not tax avoidance, these
rules nonetheless apply, and can lead to taxation in the
hands of an unintended party or double taxation without
relief.
In addition, care needs to be given to the board composition
of the offshore company and its engagement of UK
employees or contractors so as to ensure that it is not
brought into the UK by virtue of establishing corporate
residence or a branch in the UK.
4.2 Common traps and pitfalls
The anti-avoidance rules and their interaction are complex
and turn on the smallest of facts. At their simplest, the most
common issues include:
• The creation of a non-UK company by a UK resident
individual will trigger the ToAA rules. These rules will
deem the income of the offshore company to belong to
that individual and subject to UK income tax (currently up
to 45% on them personally, even if no dividend is
distributed.
• Where a UK company creates a subsidiary in a low or no
tax country to undertake its income generating activities it
will be a CFC. Its profits will be deemed to belong to its
UK parent and subject to UK CT (known as the CFC
charge). Costs incurred in the UK parent are not
deductible against this allocation. This can lead to double
taxation.
• Where an offshore company has a majority of UK resident
directors or only UK resident directors, it will likely be UK
tax resident and subject to UK CT.
• Where an offshore company has offshore directors, but
UK resident employees, a UK branch will be created and
profits attributable to the UK activities subject to UK CT.
• Where an offshore company has offshore directors and
no UK employees, but has a service agreement (and
potentially a licence agreement, depending on where IP is
owned), with a UK DevCo, profits will need to be
attributed to that DevCo on an arm's length basis either
under the TP rules, PFrag rules or IFA regime.
4.3 Special types of offshore entities and DAOs
Decentralised Autonomous Organisations (DAO) have
become an increasingly popular community led method of
organisation. There has yet to be any published guidance
from HMRC as to their view on the tax treatment. The Law
Commission considers that DAOs are a novel organisational
structure often likened to existing legal forms such as a
general partnership or unincorporated association. The tax
treatment is, therefore, uncertain. Characteristics may lead to
the conclusion that the DAO is a general partnership, in
which case profits attributable to its UK members (the
partners) would be chargeable to income tax. However, it
could be concluded that the DAO is a form of unincorporated
association, in which case the activities would fall into scope
of corporation tax.
Due to the uncertainty of legal form and, therefore, tax
treatment, many projects will set up a special type of offshore
entity or structure to establish a legal wrapper and create tax
certainty. Typically these offshore legal entities will be
"orphaned". This is typically a not-for-profit entity in that it
cannot distribute its profits to its members and include the
Cayman foundation company, the Swiss Association, the
Panama foundation, a company limited by guarantee, a
purpose trust, amongst others.

Page 75 - 
In addition to the anti-avoidance rules highlighted above, the
5.2 Founder/team token planning
creation of such structures can lead to severe inheritance tax
consequences for UK based founders, if not structured
correctly. Interestingly, provided structured correctly many if
not all the above mentioned anti-avoidance rules may be
blunted due to the decentralised nature and ambitions of the
project.
4.4 200% penalties
Where HMRC successfully identifies unpaid tax through the
use of offshore structures, the penalties, absent formal
written tax advice, will be 200% of the underpaid tax!
5. Paying the founders / team in tokens
5.1 Earnings in crypto
Businesses can pay their employees in cryptoassets. This is a
disposal for the company, and any gain or loss needs to be
accounted for. Consideration needs to be given to the value
being paid to employees, as the number of tokens that may
need to be sent to employees to satisfy their net pay may
change between the payroll processing date, and the
payment date.
If employees are being paid in stablecoin denominated in a
different currency (e.g. USDC), the exchange rates also need
to be considered. In addition, the business must withhold
PAYE and pay employees' and employers' National Insurance
Contributions (NICs).
UK businesses are also required to operate a workplace
pension for employees. More information on this can be
obtained from the pensions regulator.
If a company is paying token incentives to employees, the
tokens they pay to employees are likely to be taxable and
would be processed through the payroll. Under these
circumstances, the business will need to retain broadly 50%
of the cryptoassets they wish to pay the employee and either
fund the PAYE / employees' NIC out of any fiat currency held
or convert the cryptoassets into fiat currency.
Where the company is receiving tokens from a DAO structure
under a service agreement, careful planning is required to
match cryptoassets receipts (i.e. service fee income) with
payments in cryptoasset to employees (i.e. a deductible
expense) to minimise exposure to the volatile movements in
the valuation of these assets.
Some projects will seek to launch their own native token. The
tokenomics will usually provide an allocation to the founders
and initial start up team. It may be possible for those
founders and team to effectively mitigate the IT
consequences described above and only be subject to tax,
CGT, if and when they sell their tokens. This would require
the founders/team acquiring their token rights very early on -
before any agreements with third parties have been made
establishing a market value - under an agreement such as a
simple agreement for future tokens (SAFT), although they
have many other names.
Provided no independent value has been created (i.e. no
SAFTs with third parties have been agreed or executed
establishing a price per token), it may be possible to use a
cost based valuation to determine the price the founders/
team should pay for their tokens. This would take all costs to
date associated with the token, divided by the expected total
token supply plus an arm's length mark up = a price per
token. The founders / team must pay this for their token
allocation. A special election needs to be made by the
employer to protect the CGT treatment on the sale should
HMRC successfully challenge the valuation. It is
recommended to obtain an independent valuation.
Even though the founders/team acquire their token rights
under the SAFT, it is possible to include forfeiture clauses
whilst retaining tax benefits described. Such clauses mean
that if an employee leaves before all their tokens unlock, any
unlocked tokens may be forfeited.
A token bonus or incentive scheme requires careful planning.
5.3 Sale of tokens
For those who have received tokens, the difference in the
token's value at the time of acquisition (receipt) and
subsequent disposal will be charged to CGT.
A common misconception is that tax is only due when you
sell cryptoassets for fiat currency. This is not true. Tax is also
due when crypto is exchanged from one crypto to another;
for example, an exchange of SOL to BONK would be classed
as a "taxable event". The amount of tax due is calculated in
reference to what is called either the "pooling rules" or
"section 104".

Page 76 - These rules apply to all cryptoassets and create a "pool" for
each cryptoasset you have. If you have SOL with some
different accounts or wallets, the rules consider that these are
all in one, with other cryptoassets also having their own pool.
Therefore, the holding of SOL and BONK would be
considered separately. The rules create an average cost for
the token used to calculate any gains or losses.
It is well known that crypto can be traced and owners
identified. Tax administrations globally are increasing their
efforts to ensure that the correct tax is paid. Recently, HMRC
sent "nudge letters" to those that they considered had
potentially undeclared tax liabilities, and the information on
ownership of cryptoassets continues to grow.
The Crypto Asset Reporting Framework (CARF) is a new
The tax calculation can become more complex as the
reporting framework from the OECD that requires
number of transactions and different cryptoassets that are
cryptoasset exchanges to provide details of cryptoasset
owned increases. Additional rules, such as the same-day, 30-
transactions to tax administrations. CARF is being introduced
day rules, also apply that add further complexity.
into approximately 60 jurisdictions around the world.
Remember: tax can arise whenever tokens are disposed
of, whether or not cash is received, such as when one
cryptoasset is exchanged for another.
6. HMRC enquiries
HMRC has released the draft regulations for CARF, which will
be put into force in the UK from 1 January 2026. This will
provide HMRC with more information than ever before on
cryptoasset owners.
HMRC has a dedicated crypto team and already receive data
dumps from exchanges and other cryptoasset service
providers. HMRC will then use other means to open an
investigation such as statements on a projects or individual's
X or discord.
Cryptoasset exchanges in the scope of CARF, will be required
to put systems in place to gather the required information on
their customers. This must include gathering self-
certifications from all customers and recording all
transactions for each cryptoasset for the information to be
aggregated and submitted to HMRC.
HMRC enquiries can be lengthy and require careful handling.
In addition to any unpaid tax, interest and penalties can also
be added. Penalties depend on "customer behaviour" and
can be up to 100% of the underdeclared tax, which can
increase to up to 200% where offshore links exist.

Page 77 - 
TRACING, FREEZING AND
RECOVERY - WHEN CRYPTO
ASSETS ARE STOLEN
(Matt Green - Lawrence Stephens and
Marcin Zarakowski - Token Recovery

Page 78 - 
The misappropriation of crypto assets is common and often
versed as an operational risk. Whether:
(i) via hacking like phishing, ransomware, state sponsored
operations or data thefts;
(i) | through social engineering operations like fake
investment platforms or romance scams; or
(iii) from insider threats like rogue employees, developers
or even rug pull scams,
it feels helplessly difficult to recover the funds. Lack of a
centralised intermediary to report your loss to, pseudonymity
and near-instant transactions to anywhere in the world, are
unfortunately also strong enablers for criminal activity.
To be clear, recovery is real, court sanctioned and expected.
If assets are gone, time is of the essence. Report this to your
lawyer and or private blockchain investigation firm
immediately, and provide transaction hashes, asset type and
quantum. Always report the incident to law enforcement as a
matter of good practice and obtain a crime reference
number.
Furthermore, as a WebS builder or platform operator, you
play a pivotal role in addressing stolen crypto assets,
particularly if your project becomes a conduit for illicit
activity.
For centralised platforms that custody crypto assets,
applicable regulations often require you to collect KYC data
from users and actively detect and prevent misuse. If stolen
assets are traced to your platform, you must be prepared to
respond promptly to legal notices, freeze affected accounts,
and provide disclosure as mandated by court orders.
For decentralised and non-custodial projects, while you
cannot freeze or seize assets, you can still contribute by
providing transparent access to transaction data, educating
users about risks, responding to legal notices, and
implementing monitoring tools to detect illicit activity.
Proactive cooperation with investigations not only reduces
legal risks but also strengthens trust in your platform’s
integrity.
Cryptoasset Tracing
The usual goal of criminals is to as soon as possible convert
stolen crypto assets to fiat currency and launder the money
outside of blockchain networks. Off-ramping into fiat can
take place only through centralised service providers (e.g.
crypto exchanges), which have ability to freeze and seize
stolen funds. Therefore, your first step should be to identify
the movement and location of the assets up until such
centralised intermediaries are determined. This can be done
thanks to the very nature of blockchain technology.
Most blockchains serve as public, immutable ledgers, making
the movement of cryptoassets directly visible onchain. By
stealing crypto assets and transacting with them further,
criminals leave tamper-resistant trail of evidence, which may
be used to find them and bring them to justice. In order to do
that, it is therefore crucial to combine onchain transaction
data with offchain information (like KYC data, or wallet
ownership) to identify the individuals or entities behind
receiving or transacting addresses. This can be achieved by
using blockchain analytic tools available on the market, which
not only visualise transaction flows but also enhance them
with offchain data, such as attributing specific addresses to
cryptocurrency exchanges or other centralised service
providers.
Such tools are used to trace crypto assets and conduct
blockchain investigations by law enforcement, private crypto
recovery companies but also by crypto asset service
providers (e.g. crypto exchanges). The latter use such tools
also to regularly monitor processed transactions and assess
risks of money laundering and terrorist financing.
Criminals are well aware of the traceability of their onchain
transactions and employ various techniques to obfuscate
their activities and complicate tracing efforts. These methods
include using mixers or tumblers to mask transaction origins,
transacting through multiple services—often with accounts
opened under fake identities or via money mules—and
leveraging cross-chain bridges to move assets across
blockchains. While these tactics create additional complexity,
tracing and overcoming such obstacles is often achievable
with the right analytical tools, expertise, and persistence.

Page 79 - 
When stolen assets are held in unhosted wallets, there is
generally little that can be done to freeze or seize them, apart
from ongoing monitoring and flagging as stolen in different
databases and networks. This renders such assets "tainted,"
making them virtually untouchable for legitimate service
providers.
An exception to this rule is stablecoins—digital assets
pegged to fiat currency, such as USDT and USDC. Issued
centrally by Tether and Circle, respectively, these stablecoins
include functionalities in their underlying smart contracts that
allow the issuers to blacklist (freeze) wallets and even burn
and re-mint tokens to another wallet. In such cases, the goal
of tracing is to gather sufficient evidence to enable law
enforcement or courts to request stablecoin issuers to
blacklist the stolen assets and reassign them to their rightful
owner.
Legal Procedures
Proceeds of Crime Letters and Procedure
Once you know the location of the assets and their pathways,
the first step is a legal letter, to put the cryptocurrency
exchange or service provider on notice that they have
received the proceeds of crime, and to detail how they must
treat those assets. Failure to comply is likely to be a criminal
offence in most jurisdictions. This draws a line in the sand,
and ensures those exchanges are aware of the fraud and
their roles going forward.
That letter will include a blockchain analytics report to show
the movement and location of funds, including any mixing
services if appliable. It will also request balances at the
relevant address (or account where funds are pooled*') to
ensure pursuing funds is commercially viable. The letter also
requests certain disclosure relating to their customers who
took receipt of the funds, and to prevent any withdrawals
from the respective addresses/ accounts. The exchange
usually seeks a Court Order compelling them to do so.
Court procedures can broadly be divided into two parallel
processes, Process | being a substantive claim, outlining the
claim for, amongst other things, deceit and restitutionary
claims (making someone whole) against the bad actors and
Process 2 being interim reliefs, like injunctions to prevent the
assets from being dissipated. Process 2 is run to ensure
Process 1 is fruitful and to mitigate risks.
Identifying the Defendants
The process starts by relying on “persons unknown”
jurisdiction, meaning that categories of currently unknown
defendants can be included in proceedings.
The first defendant will be a category defined by their
actions, which may include a person who used a social
media account, hosted a platform, or at least deprived an
address of certain assets, being D1. This jurisdiction applies
where you can serve the defendant with legal documents,**
in this instance via an NFT* to the receiving address to which
the stolen funds were paid, or otherwise.
The second category of defendant is the person/ persons
who are recipients of the traced funds and are customers of
the cryptocurrency exchanges identified in the blockchain
analytics report, here called D2. These parties remain
unknown until the cryptocurrency exchange provides details
under Process 2.
The other defendants are the relevant cryptocurrency
exchanges whose customers are D2, and are not alleged to
have committed any wrongdoing. They are included to
ensure they provide disclosure of D2 (and D1 if possible) and
to comply with the freezing of funds. So long as these
exchanges can take receipt of Court documents, whether by
email, NFT to the relevant address or otherwise, they can be
included. Registrations in faraway jurisdictions, or claims of
decentralisation do not defeat this process. Similarly,
exchanges unwilling to provide their corporate structure can
be included as another category of persons unknown, being
those parties who control, operate, manage and or own that
exchange.* In any event, these exchanges are the vital
touchstone of the case, and demask D2.
79
5Piroozzadeh v Persons Unknown and Others [2023] EWHC 1024 (Ch) particularly paragraphs 8 and 26
32Bloomsbury Publishing Group Ltd v News Group Newspapers Ltd [2003] EWHC 1205 (Ch), see paragraph 21 and and CMOC Sales & Marketing Ltd v
33Person Unknown & Ors [2018] EWHC 2230 (Comm) (26 July 2018) at paragraph 9
Tippawan Boonyaem v Persons Unknown Category (A) & Ors [2023] EWHC 3180 (Comm) and by comparison Mooij v Persons Unknown (February 2024)
EWHC 814 (Comm) considering Cameron v Liverpool Victoria Insurance Co Ltd [2019] UKSC 6
%4Fabrizio D’Aloia v. (1) Persons Unknown (2) Binance Holdings Limited & Others [2022] EWCH 1723 (Ch) (June 24, 2022)
LMN v Bitflyer Holdings Inc and others [2022] EWHC 2954 (Comm)
AA v Persons Unknown & Ors, Re Bitcoin [2019] EWHC 3556 (Comm) (13 December 2019)

Page 80 - 
Freezing Funds and Disclosure
Process 1 allows for a claim against the Defendants broadly
as above. Process 2 includes a Court application made
without notice on D1 and D2, for, amongst other things, (i) the
specific treatment of the traced funds as property® (in equity
or otherwise), including to demarcate, ringfence and prevent
the withdrawal or conversion of those funds (ii) a freeze over
all of D2’s assets worldwide and (iii) identification details of
D2, including any documents or information used for
onboarding at the exchange, and any transactions details in a
specified period. We are able to rely on disclosure even
where information is fake, where the email address is
designed for a one-time use, or manipulated identification
documents are used.
Once the documents are served on D2 (now identifiable
individuals), they are entitled to give evidence at a return date
in Court. Most do not, as they are money mules uninterested
in giving evidence in formal proceedings. That is the cost of
operation. At this stage, funds should be frozen at exchanges,
and Process 2 is largely complete.
Recovering Funds
Process 1 continues, and the defendants will have a number
of days to file a defence in Court. In most instances they fail
to do so, and the victim can apply for default judgment (the
defendants have run out of time) or summary judgment
(broadly there is no reasonable grounds for defending the
claim). This is a win on paper.
As to enforcement,°” the judgment can be used to seek
recompense from the exchanges, who have D2’s assets
frozen. Another Court order will compel the exchanges to
hand over the funds, and a recovery is made. If the funds
have been cashed out, the disclosure should provide for the
D2’s bank details too, and banks can assist.
This is a very simple outline of how these processes might
run, and things can become more complicated depending
on the fact pattern. However, this process can be quick, cost
effective and prevents bad actors relying on
pseudonymisation, being located offshore, or appearing to
not exist at all.
Receiving Proceeds of Crime and Letters Requesting
Freezing
If you run, operate, manage, control or own a cryptocurrency
exchange, are a service provider which deals with
cryptocurrencies, including Web3 projects, and receive the
proceeds of crime, even unknowingly, you may still be liable
under proceeds of crime legislation.
Transaction monitoring services are extremely useful in
mitigating risks of processing and custodying the proceeds of
crime and should be used as a matter of good practice.
In the event you are aware that you are processing,
custodying or dealing with the proceeds of crime in any way,
you must deal with them carefully. If you receive a letter
alleging receipt of the proceeds of crime, you must act as if
you have done so.
Broadly you should not allow the assets to be withdrawn,
converted or transacted, and inform a member of law
enforcement without delay, called an authorised disclosure. It
is vital to check the rules around dealing with the proceeds of
crime in your relevant jurisdiction. You must also not tip off
the party who has provided those assets.
It is best practice to note instances of dealing with proceeds
of crime without delay.

Page 81 - 
YOU'RE OFF
TOKEN LAUNCH
(James Burnie and Pavan Kaur - WAGMI
Advisers, Gunnercooke)

Page 82 - 
Traditionally, token launches have been seen as a global
phenomenon, the idea being to play a numbers game to
generate as much income from the launch process as
possible. However, such an approach has become
increasingly illegal, with rules and licensing restrictions both
in terms of the place (i) where tokens are sold from and ii)
where tokens are sold to.
Furthermore, in order for a token launch to be truly
successful, it is vital to look beyond legal considerations and,
for example, curate a well-developed and functioning
community that supports the token.
Legal: Boring until it isn't!
A UK token launch: for start-
ups, a thing of the past
The act of selling a token from the United Kingdom (UK)
triggers a requirement to register with the FCA under the
Money Laundering, Terrorist Financing and Transfer of Funds
(Information on the Payer) Regulations 2017. Currently, there
are around 50 firms registered with the FCA, against a
backdrop of a failure rate of around 90% among those firms
that have applied. Whilst, with the right advisors, the process
for becoming FCA registered is clear and achievable, it is
generally not an appropriate first step for a start-up to
become registered. Rather, it is more usual to sell into the UK
from an offshore jurisdiction - and, whilst a consideration of
offshore jurisdictions is outside the scope of this guide, it is
worth noting that tax considerations have an integral role to
play in determining what jurisdiction to sell into the UK from.
Selling into the UK: getting it right matters
Once the token issuing entity is set-up, the next question is
what jurisdictions the token can be sold to. In this respect,
different countries have brought in different regimes in order
to protect their populations. For example: in the EU, this has
taken the form of MiCA; in the UK, it takes the form of the
financial promotions regime; and in the USA (whilst the
position is currently unclear), it generally takes the form of
treating the majority of cryptoasset activity as falling within
the existing securities rules. Whilst these are the most well-
known regimes, it is worth noting that most new regimes —
ranging from Kazakhstan to Botswana to Mauritius -
generally have restrictions on selling to their general
population unless local legal and requirements are met.
Traditionally, a "who cares?" approach has been taken to
these developments, the assumption being that nothing will
actually happen if these marketing rules are broken -
however, this approach is coming under increasing pressure.
There are, of course, the well-publicised moves by the SEC in
the USA to take jurisdiction over any cryptoasset enterprises
that interact with US persons (that may include persons with
a US passport even if not in the US). In the UK, we are also
seeing the FCA flex its muscles, as indeed a failure to comply
with UK requirements is a criminal offence, punishable by an
unlimited fine and imprisonment for up to 2 years. The
"criminal offence" element here is particularly important, as it
means that all service providers to a project, such as banking
partners, are handling the proceeds of crime if cryptoassets
are sold in breach of the UK financial promotion rules. As
such, the FCA has the ability to simply make a public
statement that a project is in breach of the UK rules (called a
consumer warning), and the effect will be that many service
providers will no longer be prepared to support the project
for risk of sanction. Furthermore, in more extreme cases, we
have seen the FCA and other regulators co-ordinate to bring
an end to projects considered particularly harmful.
It is worth noting that the FCA is taking a broad interpretation
regarding what is meant by selling into the UK - and
generally any communication in English needs to be
considered carefully. As such, even if the intention is not to
sell into the UK, care needs to be taken to ensure that
appropriate barriers are in place to block communications
from being viewed or accessed by persons in the UK. This
includes making sure that, for example, appropriate
disclaimers are in place to make it clear that a
communication is not intended for the UK market in all social
media posts.
Selling into the UK: the thing of the future.
Given the evolving landscape, token sales becomes a
numbers game from a legal perspective. In this respect,
whilst we have seen the UAE often held out as a jurisdiction
to sell into due to its traditionally relatively lax approach, in
practice this is limited as the hype of what can be achieved in
sales simply does not meet the reality. This causes projects to
look elsewhere. The EU, which was also previously lax in the
sense that certain licences were relatively cheap and easy to
obtain, is now moving into a more aggressive regime under
MiCA, which brings with it added uncertainty.

Page 83 - 
What is certain is that the EU will become more expensive -
however, we note that with the right structuring, it is possible
to sell tokens into the EU without requiring a MiCA licence,
and so well-informed projects will be able to manage costs.
Given, therefore, the UK is one of the largest crypto
economies globally, and the relative cost of accessing the UK
will become relatively cheaper as other jurisdictions become
more expensive, it is likely that the UK will increasingly
become a vital part of the product road-map for successful
projects.
Against this background, the Uk is likely to become a more
attractive jurisdiction to sell into. In this respect, it is worth
noting that not all cryptoassets are within the scope of UK
financial promotions regime: tokens are not in scope if they
are unregulated tokens (on which see below) and either (i)
non-fungible or (ii) non-transferable. As such, unregulated
NFTs are generally not subject to any restrictions on selling
into the UK.
Tokens are unregulated where they do not constitute e-
money or securities. The definition of e-money is relatively
narrow, and so does not cover most of the stablecoins that
currently exist, however this may change as a new regime for
regulating stablecoins used for payment services is coming
into force. The definition of security in the UK is relatively
tightly defined, by reference to a specific list of so-called
"specified investments". Most of the time, it will be clear
whether a cryptoasset is a "specified investment", as for
example tokenised equity and bonds are clearly security
tokens. Where it gets more complex is in relation to
cryptoassets where the holding of such gives a right to a
variable income, as this may imply that the cryptoasset is a
"collective investment scheme" (or in less formal language, a
"fund").
Whilst we are seeing a rise in the use of security tokens,
currently the majority of the liquidity for cryptoassets is in
unregulated tokens (i.e. not e-money nor securities), and so
generally start-ups are focussed on selling unregulated
cryptoassets into the UK. In this respect, there are a range of
options available for selling unregulated tokens into the UK
depending on budget and the intended reach for the token.
These range from using exemptions (which in very broad
terms limit participants to e.g. fund managers and companies
with assets over GBP 5 million), to listing on a UK exchange
that can make promotions on its own behalf (and thereby
indirectly promote the cryptoasset), and lastly to obtaining
sign off of promotions by firms with the appropriate FCA
authorisation to provide such sign off (which are relatively few
in number).
It is worth noting that when selling into the UK, other than
doing so on the basis of relying on one of the limited
exemptions, a proper user interface build for UK consumers
is required, for example there is a 24 hour cooling off period
and an appropriateness assessment that must be complied
with, as well as limits on the ability to use certain marketing
techniques — for example incentives such as "refer a friend"
campaigns are prohibited.
The universal passport that is the
UK legal system
Whilst the complexity of the UK rules should not be
underestimated, they do have the advantage of clarity. It is
also worth noting that different regulators are taking note of
regimes in other jurisdictions, and in this respect, we note
that the UK legal and regulatory regime, being one of the first
global movers to regulate Webs, is often used as a starting
point for other jurisdictions looking to regulate the industry. In
this respect, it is notable that UK opinions are often, for
example, accepted by non-UK exchanges as giving a solid
indication of the likely regulatory treatment of cryptoassets in
their jurisdiction, even if not technically on-point.
It is also worth noting that UK law, being internationally
recognised as robust and well-equipped to deal with the
Webs industry, is often the law of choice when contracting,
even if none of the parties involved have a UK nexus. As
such, the UK is a logical part of the international roadmap for
token projects seeking to develop a solid international
reputation.
Beyond the Legal: a CMO's
Perspective
Whilst regulation is generally jurisdictional-specific, marketing
campaigns are generally global in nature. As such, in this
section we take a more jurisdiction agnostic approach.
All token marketing campaigns worldwide must now consider
compliance at every step, though it is not as daunting as it
sounds. Incorporating legal disclaimers when seeking to
promote your token, alongside aligning communications with
your terms of business, will materially support your business'
long-term interests. This is a standard operating procedure
across all regulated industries.

Page 84 - 
While your venture is building its own unique brand identity
and community culture, it is important to take a considered
approach in order to have a robust model that will withstand
future developments. In this respect, it is worth noting that
regulators globally are starting to take an interest in how
Web3 projects are marketed, and so businesses are
beginning to adopt best practices to future-proof their
position. In this respect, we have seen firms having to defend
historic marketing to regulators when seeking (for example
to obtain licences to operate, and so getting your marketing
wrong, even if at an early stage, can cause real damage to
the future prospects of a business.
1. Community Management
Your community, although not necessarily mutually exclusive,
is divided into two groups: commercial users and token
holders (investors). Combined, they form your largest
stakeholder group (in terms of numbers of individuals) and
should be treated with a level of importance and care that
recognises this fact.
Contrary to popular belief, community management is
different to community growth with one requiring a very
different set of skills to the other. Community management is
the day-to-day oversight of your Telegram / Discord
presence.
Effective community management combines frequent and
transparent communication with the implementation of
robust moderation and security policies for all team members
within this division. Think of it like a well-oiled cog that's a
fundamental part of a larger machine, your business
operations.
Community management is imperative to treasury
nanagement.
Alongside policies, giving your Head of Community,
Community Managers, and Ambassadors professional
training therefore comes with high recommendation as,
beyond the brand championing, they need to be equipped to
identify the warning signs of a security breach, and respond
effectively to Fear, Uncertainty & Doubt (FUD).
Outsourcing your community management team may be a
quick way to 'get the job done, though it is generally not
recommended in the long term as this approach can impose
expensive fixed costs (as opposed to having SAFT
agreements with Ambassadors for example), be robotic-like
in nature and fail to create authenticity in the brand.
The question you should ask yourself continually as a founder
is, what are we doing to show our existing and prospective
token holders that we care about what we are building?
So, what approaches should you take to growing your
community?
2. Community Growth
As part of your go-to-market strategy, you will have identified
your target audience and competitive landscape, all of which
is in alignment with your tokenomics, corporate structure and
regulation. By leveraging the below tools with an overarching
pragmatic, risk-based approach, you can seek to grow a
vibrant community.
i. Influencers
While influencer campaigns are arguably one of the most
popular ways to grow your community across social media
and community channels, engaging with them is not without
reputational risk. The FCA has recently cracked down on
'Finfluencers', as they are labelled, and regulators globally
show no sign of slowing down their efforts to protect the
interests of the industry.
Founders can manage this reputational risk through
implementing robust performance screening that delves into
previous campaign metrics, including how organic their
audience is. Day-to-day management of influencers can
include implementing various KPls and creating campaigns
that align with your public relations and media outreach
strategy.
In addition, engaging with an experienced lawyer to ensure
'well written' contracts are in place, and 'dos' and 'dont's'
guidance is shared with each influencer is another solid
preventative measure founders can take.
As a general rule, seeking to engage with influencers that are
relevant to your vertical and that you genuinely believe are
needed for what you are building may be a more sustainable
approach that goes a long way with your community. After
all, if your largest stakeholder group witnesses the
development of a long-term relationship with a well-known
name in the industry, sentiment in your project can become
increasingly positive.
ii. Public Relations & Media Outreach
Press is not a 'grow a big community quick' tool. Rather,
press is a long-term investment to increase the touch points
through which retail can learn about and access your brand.

Page 85 - 
While you may seek to purchase sponsored packages
directly from Tier 1 outlets to get the word out about a
rewards scheme or milestone, gaining earned media is often
seen as the more 'sophisticated' approach and a great way of
building credibility.
It is important you work with an external provider that
understands the nuances of public relations, has an
expansive network of journalists, and has proven readership
success.
iii. Market-Makers
Market-makers are essential to ensure that there is a buyer
and seller of your token on a centralised exchange, and as
such are essential to keeping volatility at bay. As a highly
requested service provider, it is well documented that
market-makers can manipulate markets and dump tokens on
unsuspecting investors.
Founders often find themselves in a precarious position,
wanting to rely on these entities to gain traction yet
remaining unsure of their intentions. To avoid being left with
your tail between your legs, it is important to consider the
following:
• Engaging with an experienced, independent advisor who
can act as a knowledge base on your behalf in
conversations with market-makers, for example if
presented with complex financial instruments, such as
options and loans. A lack of understanding surrounding
such topics could lead to long-term financial burdens.
• Having expectation management conversations with
market-makers early on can help you in selecting a party
that aligns with your interests. For instance, how often are
they willing to check in with you and discuss
performance? Do they have a live dashboard facility
where you can track trading activity? What are their
compliance processes? Do they have adequate systems
and controls in place that prevent them from market
manipulation? Do they come with good
recommendations?
To navigate the complexities of market-making, you must stay
vigilant and well-informed. It is crucial to choose reputable
partners, carefully review contract terms, and maintain
constant communication with the market-maker. By
understanding the risks and benefits, you can make informed
decisions and protect your project.
Shooting for the moon in the beginning stages of listing your
token with Tier 1 exchanges is no longer a viable approach to
take. Creating a clearly defined listing strategy with your
external advisor that honours the value in organic growth
may be a more sustainable outlook, and one that prevents
the token landing into a crisis, impacting your treasury and
reputation.
It is also worth noting that certain exchanges will enable
access to certain jurisdictions, and so this is worth thinking
about as part of your go-to-market strategy.
iv. Whitepaper
The whitepaper is the most important promotional material
that you will create in your token launch journey. Catered to
prospective investors, it should contain detailed information
on your commercial strategy, technical implementation
strategy and token economy. As its contents are composed
of multiple disciplines, it is important to create a refined
process to align everyone in your executive team and create
a singular tone of voice that resonates with the target
audience.
As well as a mandatory legal disclaimer, adding research that
backs up your value proposition, and is correctly cited, will
aid in creating a well-rounded document for public
consumption.
Naturally, your value proposition may evolve over time, and
so it is important that when creating your whitepaper, the
wordage recognises this, thus allowing room for both
malleability in the business and managing the expectations of
investors.
v. FAQ
Supplementing the whitepaper, a robust FAQ of at least 50
questions and answers can be created to strengthen
communication around the value proposition and highlight
the depth of consideration given to all areas of interest to
investors.
The FAQ should be transparent, informative and easily
digestible. As a relatively inexpensive way of creating
meaningful content that will take investors through the token
launch and beyond ICO, it is a valuable trick to explore.

Page 86 - 
vi. Media Training
First time crypto founders may see significant value in
undergoing training to learn how to communicate with
prospective investors via the media. This applies to any
appearance, ranging from a YouTube collaboration with an
influencer to a public speech at a high-profile event.
If you understand the habits of the demographic group which
you are purporting to communicate with and are prepared
on how to answer the 'harder' questions from retail, you can
create a clear narrative with an aim to 'convert' listeners into
active participants of your ecosystem, whether that be as an
If you understand the habits of the demographic group which
you are purporting to communicate with and are prepared
on how to answer the 'harder' questions from retail, you can
create a clear narrative with an aim to 'convert' listeners into
active participants of your ecosystem, whether that be as an
investor, commercial user or follower.
Let's face the Music
and Dance
Given the complex multi-faced nature of marketing, it is easy
to spend a lot and achieve little. Or even worse, land yourself
in regulatory hot water. As such, it is important to ensure that
GTM is fully thought through well in advance of a token
launch. Because whilst dancing to a bull market is fun, there
may be trouble ahead...

Page 87 - 
THE IMPORTANCE OF
COMMUNITY AND WEB3
ACCELERATORS
(Cap - Superteam UK)

Page 88 - 
Throughout this guide, we have provided snapshots of the
many areas where projects need to cut their way through
the tangled forests of legal and regulatory factors in order to
get to a successful launch, break new ground, innovate and
create.
In some areas of this guide, there might be simple do’s and
don'ts. In other areas, it is more a question of being
competent in spotting areas, such as data protection, AML
and financial promotions, where thorny issues could entrap
your project. Being literate in the main principles and
concepts that underpin each area will allow you to separate
out the key questions and communicate most effectively
with advisors. Increasingly, technical ability in successfully
managing legal and compliance factors will be an essential
skill for projects. Projects that deal well, not just with tech,
but also with compliance and regulatory strategy, will also
benefit from a further moat and competitive advantage. The
fact that this area has some level of entry complexity is not
just to be seen as a hurdle to jump over, but also protection
that once you have made this investment of time and
energy, it will be far harder for competitors to keep up.
In this regard, as projects are starting out but also as they
grow, there is huge strength in being part of a powerful
community. As the landscape continues to develop and
mature, surrounding yourself with likeminded innovators
who are finding creative ways to overcome sectoral
challenges can be a huge source of support. The Web3
ethos has always been concentrated around the ideals of
the open-source community ethos - if there is a challenge,
there is nothing that we can’t build to overcome it. Some of
the best multidisciplinary minds in the world find themselves
in Web3, in no small part due to the everchanging
complexity and challenge of every aspect of this industry.
Whatever key principles exist, whatever market norms or
traditional ways of doing things, they can be questioned,
reimagined and redesigned.
Being around like-minded innovators to share a space,
collaborate and learn is an exciting part of your journey. The
Superteam UK member group provides this environment,
allowing you to access an everyday opportunity to
collaborate with peers at the cutting edge of the digital
economy.
So whether you are planning a GTM or at a more advanced
stage of your project, but still aiming to stay well clear of any
hot water, an important first step is to connect with your
local Superteam UK community to access support,
resources, and guidance.
Superteam accelerators and community will be both the
catalyst and the safety net that helps you achieve your vision
and ambitions in this exciting and dynamic new industry.